the man in the iron mask by alexandre dumas chapter i two old friends while 
every one at court was busy with his own affairs a man mysteriously took up his 
post behind the place de greve in the house which we once saw besieged by 
dartagnan on the occasion of a riot the principal entrance of this house was in 
the place baudoyer the house was tolerably large surrounded by gardens enclosed 
in the rue st jean by the shops of tool-makers which protected it from prying 
looks and was walled in by a triple rampart of stone noise and verdure like an 
embalmed mummy in its triple coffin the man to whom we have just alluded walked 
along with a firm step although he was no longer in his early prime his dark 
cloak and long sword outlined beneath the cloak plainly revealed a man seeking 
adventures and judging from his curling mustaches his fine and smooth skin as 
seen under his sombrero the gallantry of his adventures was unquestionable in 
fact hardly had the cavalier entered the house when the clock of st gervais 
struck eight and ten minutes afterwards a lady followed by an armed servant 
approached and knocked at the same door which an old woman immediately opened 
for her the lady raised her veil as she entered though no longer a beauty she 
was still a woman she was no longer young yet she was sprightly and of an 
imposing carriage she concealed beneath a rich toilet of exquisite taste an age 
which ninon de lenclos alone could have smiled at with impunity hardly had she 
reached the vestibule when the cavalier whose features we have only roughly 
sketched advanced towards her holding out his hand good-day my dear duchess he 
said how do you do my dear aramis replied the duchess he led her to an 
elegantly furnished apartment on whose high windows were reflected the expiring 
rays of the setting sun which filtered through the dark crests of some 
adjoining firs they sat down side by side neither of them thought of asking for 
additional light in the room and they buried themselves thus in the shadow as 
if they had wished to bury themselves in forgetfulness chevalier said the 
duchess you have never given me a single sign of life since our interview at 
fontainebleau and i confess that your presence there on the day of the 
franciscans death and your initiation in certain secrets caused me the 
liveliest astonishment i ever experienced in my whole life i can explain my 
presence there to you as well as my initiation said aramis but let us first of 
all replied the duchess quickly talk a little of ourselves for our friendship 
is by no means of recent date yes madame and if heaven wills it we shall 
continue to be friends i will not say for a long time but forever that is quite 
certain chevalier and my visit is a proof of it our interests madame the 
duchess are no longer the same that they used to be said aramis smiling without 
reserve in the dim light which could not show that his smile was less agreeable 
and less bright than formerly no chevalier at the present day we have other 
interests every period of life brings its own and as we now understand each 
other in conversing as perfectly as we formerly did without saying a word let 
us talk if you like i am at your orders duchess ah i beg your pardon how did 
you obtain my address and what was your object you ask me why i have told you 
curiosity in the first place i wished to know what you could have to do with 
the franciscan with whom i had certain business and who died so singularly you 
know that on the occasion of our interview at fontainebleau in the cemetery at 
the foot of the grave so recently closed we were both so much overcome by our 
emotions that we omitted to confide anything to each other yes madame well then 
i had no sooner left you than i repented and have ever since been most anxious 
to ascertain the truth you know that madame de longueville and myself are 
almost one i suppose i was not aware of it said aramis discreetly i remembered 
then continued the duchess that neither of us said anything to the other in the 
cemetery that you did not speak of the relationship in which you stood to the 
franciscan whose burial you had superintended and that i did not refer to the 
position in which i stood to him all which seemed to me very unworthy of two 
such old friends as ourselves and i have sought an opportunity of an interview 
with you in order to give you proof that i am devoted to you and that marie 
michon now no more has left behind her a ghost with a good memory aramis bowed 
over the duchesss hand and pressed his lips upon it you must have had some 
trouble to find me again he said yes answered the duchess annoyed to find the 
subject taking a turn which aramis wished to give it but i knew that you were a 
friend of m fouquet and so i inquired in that direction a friend oh exclaimed 
the chevalier you exaggerate madame a poor priest who has been favored by so 
generous a protector and whose heart is full of gratitude and devotion to him 
is all that i am to m fouquet he made you a bishop yes duchess so my fine 
musketeer that is your retirement in the same way that political intrigue is 
for yourself thought aramis and so he said you inquired after me at m fouquets 
easily enough you had been to fontainebleau with him and had undertaken a 
voyage to your diocese which is belle-isle-en-mer i believe no madame said 
aramis 
