the man in the iron mask by alexandre dumas chapter i two old friends while 
every one at court was busy with his own affairs a man mysteriously took up his 
post behind the place de greve in the house which we once saw besieged by 
dartagnan on the occasion of a riot the principal entrance of this house was in 
the place baudoyer the house was tolerably large surrounded by gardens enclosed 
in the rue st jean by the shops of tool-makers which protected it from prying 
looks and was walled in by a triple rampart of stone noise and verdure like an 
embalmed mummy in its triple coffin the man to whom we have just alluded walked 
along with a firm step although he was no longer in his early prime his dark 
cloak and long sword outlined beneath the cloak plainly revealed a man seeking 
adventures and judging from his curling mustaches his fine and smooth skin as 
seen under his sombrero the gallantry of his adventures was unquestionable in 
fact hardly had the cavalier entered the house when the clock of st gervais 
struck eight and ten minutes afterwards a lady followed by an armed servant 
approached and knocked at the same door which an old woman immediately opened 
for her the lady raised her veil as she entered though no longer a beauty she 
was still a woman she was no longer young yet she was sprightly and of an 
imposing carriage she concealed beneath a rich toilet of exquisite taste an age 
which ninon de lenclos alone could have smiled at with impunity hardly had she 
reached the vestibule when the cavalier whose features we have only roughly 
sketched advanced towards her holding out his hand good-day my dear duchess he 
said how do you do my dear aramis replied the duchess he led her to an 
elegantly furnished apartment on whose high windows were reflected the expiring 
rays of the setting sun which filtered through the dark crests of some 
adjoining firs they sat down side by side neither of them thought of asking for 
additional light in the room and they buried themselves thus in the shadow as 
if they had wished to bury themselves in forgetfulness chevalier said the 
duchess you have never given me a single sign of life since our interview at 
fontainebleau and i confess that your presence there on the day of the 
franciscans death and your initiation in certain secrets caused me the 
liveliest astonishment i ever experienced in my whole life i can explain my 
presence there to you as well as my initiation said aramis but let us first of 
all replied the duchess quickly talk a little of ourselves for our friendship 
is by no means of recent date yes madame and if heaven wills it we shall 
continue to be friends i will not say for a long time but forever that is quite 
certain chevalier and my visit is a proof of it our interests madame the 
duchess are no longer the same that they used to be said aramis smiling without 
reserve in the dim light which could not show that his smile was less agreeable 
and less bright than formerly no chevalier at the present day we have other 
interests every period of life brings its own and as we now understand each 
other in conversing as perfectly as we formerly did without saying a word let 
us talk if you like i am at your orders duchess ah i beg your pardon how did 
you obtain my address and what was your object you ask me why i have told you 
curiosity in the first place i wished to know what you could have to do with 
the franciscan with whom i had certain business and who died so singularly you 
know that on the occasion of our interview at fontainebleau in the cemetery at 
the foot of the grave so recently closed we were both so much overcome by our 
emotions that we omitted to confide anything to each other yes madame well then 
i had no sooner left you than i repented and have ever since been most anxious 
to ascertain the truth you know that madame de longueville and myself are 
almost one i suppose i was not aware of it said aramis discreetly i remembered 
then continued the duchess that neither of us said anything to the other in the 
cemetery that you did not speak of the relationship in which you stood to the 
franciscan whose burial you had superintended and that i did not refer to the 
position in which i stood to him all which seemed to me very unworthy of two 
such old friends as ourselves and i have sought an opportunity of an interview 
with you in order to give you proof that i am devoted to you and that marie 
michon now no more has left behind her a ghost with a good memory aramis bowed 
over the duchesss hand and pressed his lips upon it you must have had some 
trouble to find me again he said yes answered the duchess annoyed to find the 
subject taking a turn which aramis wished to give it but i knew that you were a 
friend of m fouquet and so i inquired in that direction a friend oh exclaimed 
the chevalier you exaggerate madame a poor priest who has been favored by so 
generous a protector and whose heart is full of gratitude and devotion to him 
is all that i am to m fouquet he made you a bishop yes duchess so my fine 
musketeer that is your retirement in the same way that political intrigue is 
for yourself thought aramis and so he said you inquired after me at m fouquets 
easily enough you had been to fontainebleau with him and had undertaken a 
voyage to your diocese which is belle-isle-en-mer i believe no madame said 
aramis my diocese is vannes i meant that i only thought that belle-isle-en-mer 
is a property belonging to m fouquet nothing more ah i had been told that 
belle-isle was fortified besides i know that you are a military man my friend i 
have forgotten everything of the kind since i entered the church said aramis 
annoyed very well i then learned that you had returned from vannes and i sent 
to one of our friends m le comte de la fere who is discretion itself but he 
answered that he was not aware of your address so like athos thought the bishop 
that which is actually good never alters well then you know that i cannot 
venture to show myself here and that the queen-mother has always some grievance 
or other against me yes indeed and i am surprised at it oh there are various 
reasons for it but to continue being obliged to conceal myself i was fortunate 
enough to meet with m dartagnan one of your old friends i believe a friend of 
mine still duchess he gave me some information and sent me to m de baisemeaux 
the governor of the bastille aramis started and a light flashed from his eyes 
in the darkness of the room which he could not conceal from his keen-sighted 
friend m de baisemeaux he said why did dartagnan send you to m de baisemeaux i 
cannot tell you what can this possibly mean said the bishop summoning all the 
resources of his mind to his aid in order to carry on the combat in a befitting 
manner m de baisemeaux is greatly indebted to you dartagnan told me true he is 
so and the address of a creditor is as easily ascertained as that of a debtor 
also very true and so baisemeaux indicated to you st mande where i forwarded a 
letter to you which i have in my hand and which is most precious to me said 
aramis because i am indebted to it for the pleasure of seeing you the duchess 
satisfied at having so successfully passed over the various difficulties of so 
delicate an explanation began to breathe freely again which aramis however 
could not succeed in doing we had got as far as your visit to baisemeaux i 
believe said he nay said the duchess laughing further than that in that case we 
must have been speaking about your grudge against the queen-mother further 
still returned the duchess further still we were talking of the connection 
which existed between you and the franciscan said aramis interrupting her 
eagerly well i am listening to you very attentively it is easily explained 
returned the duchess making up her mind you know that i am living at brussels 
with m de laicques i have heard so madame you know that my children have ruined 
and stripped me of everything how terrible dear duchess terrible indeed this 
obliged me to resort to some means of obtaining a livelihood and particularly 
to avoid vegetating i had old hatreds to turn to account old friendships to 
serve i no longer had either credit or protectors you too who had extended 
protection towards so many persons said aramis blandly it is always the case 
chevalier well at that time i saw the king of spain ah who had just nominated a 
general of the jesuits according to the usual custom is it usual indeed were 
you not aware of it i beg your pardon i was inattentive you must be aware of 
that you who were on such good terms with the franciscan with the general of 
the jesuits you mean exactly well then i saw the king of spain who wished to do 
me a service but was unable he gave me recommendations however to flanders both 
for myself and for laicques and conferred a pension on me out of the funds of 
the order of jesuits yes the general i mean the franciscan was sent to me and 
in order to give regularity to the transaction in accordance with the statutes 
of the order i was reputed to be in a position to render certain services you 
are aware that that is the rule i was not aware of it madame de chevreuse 
paused to look at aramis but it was quite dark well such is the rule she 
resumed i ought therefore to seem to possess a power of usefulness of some kind 
or other i proposed to travel for the order and i was placed on the list of 
affiliated travellers you understand that it was a formality by means of which 
i received my pension which was very convenient for me good heavens duchess 
what you tell me is like a dagger-thrust to me you obliged to receive a pension 
from the jesuits no chevalier from spain ah except as a conscientious scruple 
duchess you will admit that it is pretty nearly the same thing no not at all 
but surely of your magnificent fortune there must remain dampierre is all that 
remains and that is handsome enough yes but dampierre is burdened mortgaged and 
somewhat in ruins like its owner and can the queen-mother see all that without 
shedding a tear said aramis with a penetrating look which encountered nothing 
but the darkness yes she has forgotten everything you have i believe duchess 
attempted to get restored to favor yes but most singularly the young king 
inherits the antipathy that his dear father had for me ah you too will tell me 
that i am indeed a woman to be hated and that i am no longer one who can be 
loved dear duchess pray arrive soon at the circumstance which brought you here 
for i think we can be of service to each other such has been my own thought i 
came to fontainebleau then with a double object in view in the first place i 
was summoned there by the franciscan whom you knew by the by how did you know 
him for i have told you my story and have not yet heard yours i knew him in a 
very natural way duchess i studied theology with him at parma we became fast 
friends but it happened from time to time that business or travels or war 
separated us from each other you were of course aware that he was the general 
of the jesuits i suspected it but by what extraordinary chance did you come to 
the hotel where the affiliated travellers had met together oh said aramis in a 
calm voice it was the merest chance in the world i was going to fontainebleau 
to see m fouquet for the purpose of obtaining an audience of the king i was 
passing by unknown i saw the poor dying monk in the road and recognized him you 
know the rest he died in my arms yes but bequeathing to you so vast a power in 
heaven and on earth that you issue sovereign orders in his name he did leave me 
a few commissions to settle and for me i have told you a sum of twelve thousand 
livres was to be paid to you i thought i had given you the necessary signature 
to enable you to receive it did you not get the money oh yes yes my dear 
prelate you give your orders i am informed with so much mystery and such august 
majesty that it is generally believed you are the successor of the beloved dead 
aramis colored impatiently and the duchess continued i have obtained 
information she said from the king of spain himself and he dispelled my doubts 
on the point every general of the jesuits is nominated by him and must be a 
spaniard according to the statutes of the order you are not a spaniard nor have 
you been nominated by the king of spain aramis did not reply to this remark 
except to say you see duchess how greatly you were mistaken since the king of 
spain told you that yes my dear aramis but there was something else of which i 
have been thinking what is that you know that i do a great deal of desultory 
thinking and it occurred to me that you know the spanish language every 
frenchman who has been actively engaged in the fronde knows spanish you have 
lived in flanders three years and have stayed at madrid fifteen months you are 
in a position then to become a naturalized spaniard when you like really said 
aramis with a frankness which deceived the duchess undoubtedly two years 
residence and an acquaintance with the language are indispensable you have had 
three years and a half fifteen months more than is necessary what are you 
driving at my dear lady at this i am on good terms with the king of spain and i 
am not on bad terms thought aramis to himself do you wish me to ask the king 
continued the duchess to confer the succession to the franciscans office upon 
you oh duchess you have it already perhaps she said no upon my honor very well 
then i can render you that service why did you not render the same service to m 
de laicques duchess he is a very talented man and one whom you love yes no 
doubt but that is not to be considered at all events putting laicques aside 
answer me will you have it no i thank you duchess she paused he is nominated 
she thought and then resumed aloud if you refuse me in this manner it is not 
very encouraging for me to ask anything of you oh ask pray ask ask i cannot do 
so if you have not the power to grant what i want however limited my power and 
ability ask all the same i need a sum of money to restore dampierre ah replied 
aramis coldly money well duchess how much would you require oh a tolerably 
round sum so much the worse you know i am not rich no you are not but the order 
is and if you had been the general you know i am not the general in that case 
you have a friend who must be very wealthy m fouquet m fouquet he is more than 
half ruined madame so it is said but i would not believe it why duchess because 
i have or rather laicques has certain letters in his possession from cardinal 
mazarin which establish the existence of very strange accounts what accounts 
relative to various sums of money borrowed and disposed of i do not fully 
remember but the point is that the superintendent according to these letters 
which are signed by mazarin had taken thirty millions from the coffers of the 
state the case is a very serious one aramis clinched his hands in anxiety and 
apprehension is it possible he said that you have such letters and have not 
communicated them to m fouquet ah replied the duchess i keep such little 
matters as these in reserve when the day of need comes we will take them from 
the closet and that day has arrived said aramis yes and you are going to show 
those letters to m fouquet i prefer instead to talk about them with you you 
must be in sad want of money my poor friend to think of such things as these 
you too who held m de mazarins prose effusions in such indifferent esteem the 
fact is i am in want of money and then continued aramis in cold accents it must 
have been very distressing to you to be obliged to have recourse to such a 
means it is cruel oh if i had wished to do harm instead of good said madame de 
chevreuse instead of asking the general of the order or m fouquet for the five 
hundred thousand livres i require five hundred thousand livres yes no more do 
you think it much i require at least as much as that to restore dampierre yes 
madame i say therefore that instead of asking for this amount i should have 
gone to see my old friend the queen-mother the letters from her husband the 
signor mazarini would have served me as an introduction and i should have 
begged this mere trifle of her saying to her i wish madame to have the honor of 
receiving your majesty at dampierre permit me to put dampierre in a fit state 
for that purpose aramis did not say a single word in reply well she said what 
are you thinking about i am making certain additions said aramis and m fouquet 
makes subtractions i on the other hand am trying the art of multiplication what 
excellent calculators we are how well we could understand one another will you 
allow me to reflect said aramis no to such an overture between persons like 
ourselves yes or no should be the reply and that immediately it is a snare 
thought the bishop it is impossible that anne of austria would listen to such a 
woman as this well said the duchess well madame i should be very much 
astonished if m fouquet had five hundred thousand livres at his disposal at the 
present moment it is of no use speaking of it further then said the duchess and 
dampierre must get restored how it can oh you are not embarrassed to such an 
extent as that i suppose no i am never embarrassed and the queen continued the 
bishop will certainly do for you what the superintendent is unable to do oh 
certainly but tell me do you not think it would be better that i should speak 
myself to m fouquet about these letters you will do whatever you please in that 
respect duchess m fouquet either feels or does not feel himself to be guilty if 
he really be so i know that he is proud enough not to confess it if he be not 
so he will be exceedingly offended at your menace as usual you reason like an 
angel said the duchess rising and so you are going to denounce m fouquet to the 
queen said aramis denounce oh what a disagreeable word i shall not denounce my 
dear friend you now know matters of policy too well to be ignorant how easily 
these affairs are arranged i shall merely side against m fouquet and nothing 
more and in a war of party against party a weapon is a weapon no doubt and once 
on friendly terms again with the queen-mother i may be dangerous towards some 
persons you are at perfect liberty to be so duchess a liberty of which i shall 
avail myself my dear friend you are not ignorant i suppose duchess that m 
fouquet is on the best terms with the king of spain oh i suppose so if 
therefore you begin a party warfare against m fouquet he will reply in the same 
way for he too is at perfect liberty to do so is he not oh certainly and as he 
is on good terms with spain he will make use of that friendship as a weapon you 
mean that he will be on good terms with the general of the order of the jesuits 
my dear aramis that may be the case duchess and that consequently the pension i 
have been receiving from the order will be stopped i am greatly afraid it might 
be well i must contrive to console myself for after richelieu after the frondes 
after exile what is there left for madame de chevreuse to fear the pension you 
are aware is forty-eight thousand livres alas i am quite aware of it moreover 
in party contests you know the friends of the enemy do not escape ah you mean 
that poor laicques will have to suffer i am afraid it is almost inevitable 
duchess oh he receives only twelve thousand livres pension yes but the king of 
spain has some influence left advised by m fouquet he might get m laicques shut 
up in some fortress i have no great fear of that my good friend because thanks 
to a reconciliation with anne of austria i will undertake that france shall 
insist upon laicquess liberation true in that case you will have something else 
to apprehend what can that be said the duchess pretending to be surprised and 
terrified you will learn indeed you must know it already that having once been 
an affiliated member of the order it is not easy to leave it for the secrets 
that any particular member may have acquired are unwholesome and carry with 
them the germs of misfortune for whoever may reveal them the duchess considered 
for a moment and then said that is more serious i will think it over 
notwithstanding the profound obscurity in which he sat aramis seemed to feel a 
burning glance like a hot iron escape from his friends eyes and plunge into his 
heart let us recapitulate said aramis determined to keep himself on his guard 
and gliding his hand into his breast where he had a dagger concealed exactly 
let us recapitulate good accounts make good friends the suppression of your 
pension forty-eight thousand livres and that of laicquess twelve make together 
sixty thousand livres that is what you mean i suppose precisely and i was 
trying to find out what would be your equivalent for that five hundred thousand 
livres which i shall get from the queen or which you will not get i know a 
means of procuring them said the duchess thoughtlessly this remark made the 
chevalier prick up his ears and from the moment when his adversary had 
committed this error his mind was so thoroughly on its guard that he seemed 
every moment to gain the advantage more and more and she consequently to lose 
it i will admit for arguments sake that you obtain the money he resumed you 
will lose twice as much having a hundred thousand livres pension to receive 
instead of sixty thousand and that for a period of ten years not so for i shall 
only be subjected to this diminution of my income during the period of m 
fouquets remaining in power a period which i estimate at two months ah said 
aramis i am frank you see i thank you for it duchess but you would be wrong to 
suppose that after m fouquets disgrace the order would resume the payment of 
your pension i know a means of making the order come down with its money as i 
know a means of forcing the queen-mother to concede what i require in that case 
duchess we are all obliged to strike our flags to you the victory is yours and 
the triumph also is yours be clement i entreat you but is it possible resumed 
the duchess without taking notice of the irony that you really draw back from a 
miserable sum of five hundred thousand livres when it is a question of sparing 
you i mean your friend i beg your pardon i ought rather to say your protector 
the disagreeable consequences which a party contest produces duchess i will 
tell you why supposing the five hundred thousand livres were to be given to you 
m de laicques will require his share which will be another five hundred 
thousand livres i presume and then after m de laicquess and your own portions 
will come the portions for your children your poor pensioners and various other 
persons and these letters however compromising they may be are not worth from 
three to four millions good heavens duchess the queen of frances diamonds were 
surely worth more than these bits of waste paper signed by mazarin and yet 
their recovery did not cost a fourth part of what you ask for yourself yes that 
is true but the merchant values his goods at his own price and it is for the 
purchaser to buy or to refuse stay a moment duchess would you like me to tell 
you why i will not buy your letters pray tell me because the letters which you 
say are mazarins are false nonsense i have no doubt of it for it would to say 
the least be very singular that after you had quarrelled with the queen through 
m mazarins means you should have kept up any intimate acquaintance with the 
latter it would savor of passion of treachery of upon my word i do not like to 
make use of the term oh pray say it of compliance that is quite true but what 
is not less so is that which the letter contains i pledge you my word duchess 
that you will not be able to make use of it with the queen oh yes indeed i can 
make use of everything with the queen very good thought aramis croak on old owl 
hiss viper that you are but the duchess had said enough and advanced a few 
steps towards the door aramis however had reserved a humiliation which she did 
not expect the imprecation of the vanquished behind the car of the conqueror he 
rang the bell candles immediately appeared in the room and the bishop found 
himself completely encircled by lights which shone upon the worn haggard face 
of the duchess aramis fixed a long and ironical look upon her pale and withered 
cheeks upon her dim dull eyes and upon her lips which she kept carefully closed 
over her blackened and scanty teeth he however had thrown himself into a 
graceful attitude with his haughty and intelligent head thrown back he smiled 
so as to reveal his teeth which were still brilliant and dazzling in the 
candle-light the old coquette understood the trick that had been played upon 
her she was standing immediately before a large mirror in which all her 
decrepitude so carefully concealed was only made more manifest by the contrast 
thereupon without even saluting aramis who bowed with the ease and grace of the 
musketeer of early days she hurried away with tottering steps which her very 
haste only the more impeded aramis sprang across the room like a zephyr to lead 
her to the door madame de chevreuse made a sign to her huge lackey who resumed 
his musket and she left the house where such tender friends had not been able 
to understand each other only because they had understood each other too well 
chapter ii wherein may be seen that a bargain which cannot be made with one 
person can be carried out with another aramis had been perfectly correct in his 
supposition immediately on leaving the house in the place baudoyer madame de 
chevreuse had proceeded homeward she was doubtless afraid of being followed and 
had sought in this way to cover her steps but as soon as she had arrived within 
the door of the hotel and assured herself that no one who could cause her any 
uneasiness was on her track she opened the door of the garden leading into 
another street and hurried towards the rue croix-des-petits-champs where m 
colbert resided we have already said that evening or rather night had closed in 
and it was a dark thick night paris had once more sunk into its calm quiescent 
state enshrouding alike within its indulgent mantle the high-born duchess 
carrying out her political intrigue and the simple citizens wife who having 
been detained late by a supper in the city was proceeding homewards on the arm 
of a lover by the longest possible route madame de chevreuse had been too well 
accustomed to nocturnal politics not to know that a minister never denies 
himself even at his own private residence to any young and beautiful woman who 
may chance to object to the dust and confusion of a public office or to old 
women as full of experience as of years who dislike the indiscreet echo of 
official residences a valet received the duchess under the peristyle and 
received her it must be admitted with some indifference of manner he intimated 
after having looked at her face that it was hardly at such an hour that one so 
advanced in years as herself could be permitted to disturb m colberts important 
occupations but madame de chevreuse without disquietude wrote her name upon a 
leaf of her tablets a blusterous name which had so often sounded disagreeably 
in the ears of louis xiii and of the great cardinal she wrote her name in the 
large ill-formed characters of the higher classes of that period folded the 
paper in a manner peculiarly her own and handed it to the valet without 
uttering a word but with so haughty and imperious a gesture that the fellow 
well accustomed to judge of people from their manners and appearance perceived 
at once the quality of the person before him bowed his head and ran to m 
colberts room the minister could not control a sudden exclamation as he opened 
the paper and the valet gathering from it the interest with which his master 
regarded the mysterious visitor returned as fast as he could to beg the duchess 
to follow him she ascended to the first floor of the beautiful new house very 
slowly rested herself on the landing-place in order not to enter the apartment 
out of breath and appeared before m colbert who with his own hands held open 
the folding-doors the duchess paused at the threshold for the purpose of 
studying well the character of the man with whom she was about to converse at 
the first glance the round large heavy head thick brows and ill-favored 
features of colbert who wore thrust low down on his head a cap like a priests 
calotte seemed to indicate that but little difficulty was likely to be met with 
in her negotiations with him but also that she was to expect little interest in 
the discussion of particulars for there was scarcely any indication that that 
rude man could be susceptible to the attractions of a refined revenge or of an 
exalted ambition but when on closer inspection the duchess perceived the small 
piercingly black eyes the longitudinal wrinkles of his high and massive 
forehead the imperceptible twitching of the lips on which were apparent traces 
of rough good-humor she changed her mind and said to herself i have found the 
man i want what has procured me the honor of your visit madame he inquired the 
need i have of you monsieur returned the duchess and that which you have of me 
i am delighted madame with the first portion of your sentence but so far as the 
second portion is concerned madame de chevreuse sat down in the arm-chair which 
m colbert placed before her m colbert you are the intendant of finances yes 
madame and are ambitious of becoming the superintendent madame nay do not deny 
it that would only unnecessarily prolong our conversation it is useless and yet 
madame replied the intendant however well disposed and inclined to show 
politeness i may be towards a lady of your position and merit nothing will make 
me confess that i have ever entertained the idea of supplanting my superior i 
said nothing about supplanting m colbert could i accidentally have made use of 
that word i hardly think so the word replace is less aggressive in its 
signification and more grammatically suitable as m de voiture would say i 
presume therefore that you are ambitious of replacing m fouquet m fouquets 
fortune madame enables him to withstand all attempts the superintendent in this 
age plays the part of the colossus of rhodes the vessels pass beneath him and 
do not overthrow him i ought to have availed myself of that very comparison it 
is true m fouquet plays the part of the colossus of rhodes but i remember to 
have heard it said by m conrart a member of the academy i believe that when the 
colossus of rhodes fell from its lofty position the merchant who had cast it 
down a merchant nothing more m colbert loaded four hundred camels with the 
ruins a merchant that is considerably less than an intendant of finances madame 
i can assure you that i shall never overthrow m fouquet very good m colbert 
since you persist in showing so much sensitiveness with me as if you were 
ignorant that i am madame de chevreuse and also that i am somewhat advanced in 
years in other words that you have to do with a woman who has had political 
dealings with the cardinal de richelieu and who has no time to lose since i say 
you commit that imprudence i shall go and find others who are more intelligent 
and more desirous of making their fortunes how madame how you give me a very 
poor idea of the negotiations of the present day monsieur i assure you that if 
in my time a woman had gone to m de cinq-mars who was not moreover a man of a 
very high order of intellect and had said to him about the cardinal what i have 
just now said to you of m fouquet m de cinq-mars would by this time have put 
his irons in the fire nay madame show a little indulgence well then you do 
really consent to replace m fouquet certainly i do if the king dismisses m 
fouquet again a word too much it is quite evident that if you have not yet 
succeeded in driving m fouquet from his post it is because you have not been 
able to do so therefore i should be a simpleton if in coming to you i did not 
bring you the very thing you require i am distressed to be obliged to persist 
madame said colbert after a silence which enabled the duchess to sound the 
depth of his dissimulation but i must warn you that for the last six years 
denunciation after denunciation has been made against m fouquet and he has 
remained unshaken and unaffected by them there is a time for everything m 
colbert those who were the authors of such denunciations were not called madame 
de chevreuse and they had no proofs equal to the six letters from m de mazarin 
which establish the offence in question the offence the crime if you like it 
better the crime committed by m fouquet nothing less it is rather strange m 
colbert but your face which just now was cold and indifferent is now all 
lighted up a crime i am delighted to see it makes an impression upon you oh 
that is a word madame which embraces so many things it embraces the post of 
superintendent of finance for yourself and a letter of exile or the bastille 
for m fouquet forgive me madame the duchess but it is almost impossible that m 
fouquet can be exiled to be imprisoned or disgraced that alone is much oh i am 
perfectly aware of what i am saying returned madame de chevreuse coldly i do 
not live at such a distance from paris as not to know what takes place there 
the king does not like m fouquet and he would willingly sacrifice the 
superintendent if an opportunity were only presented it must be a good one 
though good enough and one i estimate to be worth five hundred thousand livres 
in what way said colbert i mean monsieur that holding this opportunity in my 
own hands i will not allow it to be transferred to yours except for a sum of 
five hundred thousand livres i understand you perfectly madame but since you 
have fixed a price for the sale let me now see the value of the articles to be 
sold oh a mere trifle six letters as i have already told you from m de mazarin 
and the autographs will most assuredly not be regarded as too costly if they 
establish in an irrefutable manner that m fouquet has embezzled large sums of 
money from the treasury and appropriated them to his own purposes in an 
irrefutable manner do you say observed colbert whose eyes sparkled with delight 
irrefutable would you like to read the letters with all my heart copies of 
course of course the copies said the duchess as she drew from her bosom a small 
packet of papers flattened by her velvet bodice read she said colbert eagerly 
snatched the papers and devoured them wonderful he said it is clear enough is 
it not yes madame yes m mazarin must have handed the money to m fouquet who 
must have kept it for his own purposes but the question is what money exactly 
what money if we come to terms i will join to these six letters a seventh which 
will supply you with the fullest particulars colbert reflected and the 
originals of these letters a useless question to ask exactly as if i were to 
ask you m colbert whether the money-bags you will give me will be full or empty 
very good madame is it concluded no for there is one circumstance to which 
neither of us has given any attention name it m fouquet can be utterly ruined 
under the circumstances you have detailed only by means of legal proceedings 
well a public scandal yes what then neither the legal proceedings nor the 
scandal can be begun against him why not because he is procureur-general of the 
parliament because too in france the government the army the courts of law and 
commerce are intimately connected by ties of good-will which people call esprit 
de corps so madame the parliament will never permit its chief to be dragged 
before a public tribunal and never even if he be dragged there by royal 
authority never will he be condemned ah ma foi m colbert that doesnt concern me 
i am aware of that madame but it concerns me and it consequently diminishes the 
value of what you have brought to me of what use to bring me a proof of crime 
without the possibility of condemnation even if he be only suspected m fouquet 
will lose his post of superintendent that would be a great achievement 
exclaimed colbert whose dark gloomy features were momentarily lighted up by an 
expression of hate and vengeance ah ah m colbert said the duchess forgive me 
but i did not think you were so impressionable very good in that case since you 
need more than i have to give you there is no occasion to speak of the matter 
further yes madame we will go on talking of it only as the value of your 
commodities has decreased you must lower your price you are bargaining then 
every man who wishes to deal loyally is obliged to do so how much will you 
offer me two hundred thousand livres said colbert the duchess laughed in his 
face and then said suddenly wait a moment i have another arrangement to propose 
will you give me three hundred thousand livres no no oh you can either accept 
or refuse my terms besides that is not all more still you are becoming too 
impracticable to deal with madame less so than you think perhaps for it is not 
money i am going to ask you for what is it then a service you know that i have 
always been most affectionately attached to the queen and i am desirous of 
having an interview with her majesty with the queen yes m colbert with the 
queen who is i admit no longer my friend and who has ceased to be so for a long 
time past but who may again become so if the opportunity be only given her her 
majesty has ceased to receive any one madame she is a great sufferer and you 
may be aware that the paroxysms of her disease occur with greater frequency 
than ever that is the very reason why i wish to have an interview with her 
majesty in flanders we have many diseases of that kind cancers a fearful 
incurable disorder do not believe that m colbert the flemish peasant is 
something of a savage he has not a wife exactly but a female well madame well m 
colbert while he is smoking his pipe the woman works it is she who draws the 
water from the well she who loads the mule or the ass and even bears herself a 
portion of the burden taking but little care of herself she gets knocked about 
here and there sometimes is even beaten cancers arise from contusions true true 
said colbert the flemish women do not die the sooner on that account when they 
are great sufferers from this disease they go in search of remedies and the 
beguines of bruges are excellent doctors for every kind of disease they have 
precious waters of one sort or another specifics of various kinds and they give 
a bottle and a wax candle to the sufferer they derive a profit from the priests 
and serve god by the disposal of their two articles of merchandise i will take 
the queen some of this holy water which i will procure from the beguines of 
bruges her majesty will recover and will burn as many wax candles as she may 
think fit you see m colbert to prevent my seeing the queen is almost as bad as 
committing the crime of regicide you are madame the duchess a woman of great 
intelligence you surprise me still i cannot but suppose that this charitable 
consideration towards the queen covers some small personal interest of your own 
have i tried to conceal it m colbert you spoke i believe of a small personal 
interest understand then that it is a great interest and i will prove it to you 
by resuming what i was saying if you procure me a personal interview with her 
majesty i will be satisfied with the three hundred thousand livres i have 
demanded if not i shall keep my letters unless indeed you give me on the spot 
five hundred thousand livres for them and rising from her seat with this 
decisive remark the old duchess left m colbert in a disagreeable perplexity to 
bargain any further was out of the question not to purchase would involve 
infinite loss madame he said i shall have the pleasure of handing you over a 
hundred thousand crowns but how shall i get the actual letters in the simplest 
manner in the world my dear m colbert whom will you trust the financier began 
to laugh silently so that his large eyebrows went up and down like the wings of 
a bat upon the deep lines of his yellow forehead no one he said you surely will 
make an exception in your own favor m colbert how is that madame i mean that if 
you would take the trouble to accompany me to the place where the letters are 
they would be delivered into your own hands and you would be able to verify and 
check them quite true you would bring the hundred thousand crowns with you at 
the same time for i too do not trust any one colbert colored to the tips of his 
ears like all eminent men in the art of figures he was of an insolent and 
mathematical probity i will take with me madame he said two orders for the 
amount agreed upon payable at my treasury will that satisfy you would that the 
orders on your treasury were for two millions monsieur the intendant i shall 
have the pleasure of showing you the way then allow me to order my carriage i 
have a carriage below monsieur colbert coughed like an irresolute man he 
imagined for a moment that the proposition of the duchess was a snare that 
perhaps some one was waiting at the door and that she whose secret had just 
been sold to colbert for a hundred thousand crowns had already offered it to 
fouquet for the same sum as he still hesitated a good deal the duchess looked 
at him full in the face you prefer your own carriage she said i admit that i do 
you suppose that i am going to lead you into a snare or trap of some sort or 
other madame the duchess you have the character of being somewhat inconsiderate 
at times and as i am clothed in a sober solemn character a jest or practical 
joke might compromise me yes the fact is you are afraid well then take your own 
carriage as many servants as you like only consider well what we two may 
arrange between us we are the only persons who know it what a third person may 
witness we announce to the universe after all i do not make a point of it my 
carriage shall follow yours and i shall be satisfied to accompany you in your 
own carriage to the queen to the queen have you forgotten that already is it 
possible that one of the clauses of the agreement of so much importance to me 
can have escaped you already how trifling it seems to you indeed if i had known 
it i should have doubled my price i have reflected madame and i shall not 
accompany you really and why not because i have the most perfect confidence in 
you you overpower me but how do i receive the hundred thousand crowns here they 
are madame said colbert scribbling a few lines on a piece of paper which he 
handed to the duchess adding you are paid the trait is a fine one m colbert and 
i will reward you for it she said beginning to laugh madame de chevreuses laugh 
had a very sinister sound every man who feels youth faith love life itself 
throbbing in his heart would prefer tears to such a lamentable laugh the 
duchess opened the front of her dress and drew forth from her bosom somewhat 
less white than it once had been a small packet of papers tied with a 
flame-colored ribbon and still laughing she said there m colbert are the 
originals of cardinal mazarins letters they are now your own property she added 
refastening the body of her dress your fortune is secured and now accompany me 
to the queen no madame if you are again about to run the chance of her majestys 
displeasure and it were known at the palais-royal that i had been the means of 
introducing you there the queen would never forgive me while she lived no there 
are certain persons at the palace who are devoted to me who will procure you an 
admission without my being compromised just as you please provided i enter what 
do you term those religious women at bruges who cure disorders beguines good 
you are a beguine as you please but i must soon cease to be one that is your 
affair excuse me but i do not wish to be exposed to a refusal that is again 
your own affair madame i am going to give directions to the head valet of the 
gentleman in waiting on her majesty to allow admission to a beguine who brings 
an effectual remedy for her majestys sufferings you are the bearer of my letter 
you will undertake to be provided with the remedy and will give every 
explanation on the subject i admit a knowledge of a beguine but i deny all 
knowledge of madame de chevreuse here madame then is your letter of 
introduction chapter iii the skin of the bear colbert handed the duchess the 
letter and gently drew aside the chair behind which she was standing madame de 
chevreuse with a very slight bow immediately left the room colbert who had 
recognized mazarins handwriting and had counted the letters rang to summon his 
secretary whom he enjoined to go in immediate search of m vanel a counsellor of 
the parliament the secretary replied that according to his usual practice m 
vanel had just at that moment entered the house in order to render to the 
intendant an account of the principal details of the business which had been 
transacted during the day in the sitting of the parliament colbert approached 
one of the lamps read the letters of the deceased cardinal over again smiled 
repeatedly as he recognized the great value of the papers which madame de 
chevreuse had just delivered to him and burying his head in his hands for a few 
minutes reflected profoundly in the mean time a tall large-made man entered the 
room his spare thin face steady look and hooked nose as he entered colberts 
cabinet with a modest assurance of manner revealed a character at once supple 
and decided supple towards the master who could throw him the prey firm towards 
the dogs who might possibly be disposed to dispute it with him m vanel carried 
a voluminous bundle of papers under his arm and placed it on the desk on which 
colbert was leaning both his elbows as he supported his head good-day m vanel 
said the latter rousing himself from his meditation good-day monseigneur said 
vanel naturally you should say monsieur and not monseigneur replied colbert 
gently we give the title of monseigneur to ministers returned vanel with 
extreme self-possession and you are a minister not yet you are so in point of 
fact and i call you monseigneur accordingly besides you are my seigneur and 
that is sufficient if you dislike my calling you monseigneur before others 
allow me at least to call you so in private colbert raised his head to the 
height of the lamps and read or tried to read upon vanels face how much actual 
sincerity entered into this protestation of devotion but the counsellor knew 
perfectly well how to sustain the weight of his look even were it armed with 
the full authority of the title he had conferred colbert sighed he had read 
nothing in vanels face vanel might be sincere colbert recollected that this man 
inferior to himself was superior to him in having an unfaithful wife at the 
moment he was pitying this mans lot vanel coolly drew from his pocket a 
perfumed letter sealed with spanish wax and held it towards colbert saying a 
letter from my wife monseigneur colbert coughed took opened and read the letter 
and then put it carefully away in his pocket while vanel unconcerned turned 
over the leaves of the papers he had brought with him vanel colbert said 
suddenly to his protege you are a hard-working man yes monseigneur would twelve 
hours of labor frighten you i work fifteen hours every day impossible a 
counsellor need not work more than three hours a day in the parliament oh i am 
working up some returns for a friend of mine in the department of accounts and 
as i still have time left on my hands i am studying hebrew your reputation 
stands high in the parliament vanel i believe so monseigneur you must not grow 
rusty in your post of counsellor what must i do to avoid it purchase a high 
place small ambitions are the most difficult to satisfy small purses are the 
most difficult to fill monseigneur what post have you in view said colbert i 
see none not one there is one certainly but one need be the king himself to be 
able to buy it without inconvenience and the king will not be inclined i 
suppose to purchase the post of procureur-general at these words vanel fixed 
his dull and humble look upon colbert who could hardly tell whether vanel had 
comprehended him or not why do you speak to me monseigneur said vanel of the 
post of procureur-general to the parliament i know no other post than the one m 
fouquet fills exactly so my dear counsellor you are not over-fastidious 
monseigneur but before the post can be bought it must be offered for sale i 
believe m vanel that it will be for sale before long for sale what m fouquets 
post of procureur-general so it is said the post which renders him inviolable 
for sale oh oh said vanel beginning to laugh would you be afraid then of the 
post said colbert gravely afraid no but nor desirous of obtaining it you are 
laughing at me monseigneur replied vanel is it likely that a counsellor of the 
parliament would not be desirous of becoming procureur-general well m vanel 
since i tell you that the post will be shortly for sale i cannot help repeating 
monseigneur that it is impossible a man never throws away the buckler behind 
which he maintains his honor his fortune and his life there are certain men mad 
enough vanel to fancy themselves out of the reach of all mischances yes 
monseigneur but such men never commit their mad acts for the advantage of the 
poor vanels of the world why not for the very reason that those vanels are poor 
it is true that m fouquets post might cost a good round sum what would you bid 
for it m vanel everything i am worth which means three or four hundred thousand 
livres and the post is worth a million and a half at the very lowest i know 
persons who have offered seventeen hundred thousand livres without being able 
to persuade m fouquet to sell besides supposing it were to happen that m 
fouquet wished to sell which i do not believe in spite of what i have been told 
ah you have heard something about it then who told you m gourville m pellisson 
and others very good if therefore m fouquet did wish to sell i could not buy it 
just yet since the superintendent will only sell for ready money and no one has 
a million and a half to throw down at once colbert suddenly interrupted the 
counsellor by an imperious gesture he had begun to meditate observing his 
superiors serious attitude and his perseverance in continuing the conversation 
on this subject vanel awaited the solution without venturing to precipitate it 
explain fully to me said colbert at length the privileges of the office of 
procureur-general the right of impeaching every french subject who is not a 
prince of the blood the right of quashing all proceedings taken against any 
frenchman who is neither king nor prince the procureur-general is the arm of 
the king to strike the evil-doer his arm also to extinguish the torch of 
justice m fouquet therefore will be able by stirring up the parliament to 
maintain himself even against the king and the king also by humoring m fouquet 
can get his edicts registered without opposition the procureur-general can be a 
very useful or a very dangerous instrument vanel would you like to be 
procureur-general said colbert suddenly softening both his look and his voice i 
exclaimed the latter i have already had the honor to represent to you that i 
want about eleven hundred thousand livres to make up the amount borrow that sum 
from your friends i have no friends richer than myself you are an honorable man 
vanel ah monseigneur if the world were to think as you do i think so and that 
is quite enough and if it should be needed i will be your security remember the 
proverb monseigneur what is that the endorser pays let that make no difference 
vanel rose quite bewildered by this offer which had been so suddenly and 
unexpectedly made to him by a man who treated the smallest affairs in a serious 
spirit you are not trifling with me monseigneur he said stay we must act 
quickly you say that m gourville has spoken to you about m fouquets post yes 
and m pellisson also officially or officiously these were their words these 
parliamentary people are ambitious and wealthy they ought to get together two 
or three millions among themselves to present to their protector and great 
luminary m fouquet and what did you reply i said that for my own part i would 
give ten thousand livres if necessary ah you like m fouquet then exclaimed 
colbert with a look full of hatred no but m fouquet is our chief he is in debt 
is on the high-road to ruin and we ought to save the honor of the body of which 
we are members this explains to me why m fouquet will be always safe and sound 
so long as he occupies his present post replied colbert thereupon said vanel m 
gourville added if we were to do anything out of charity to m fouquet it could 
not be otherwise than most humiliating to him and he would be sure to refuse it 
let the parliament subscribe among themselves to purchase in a proper manner 
the post of procureur-general in that case all would go on well the honor of 
our body would be saved and m fouquets pride spared that is an opening i 
considered it so monseigneur well m vanel you will go at once and find out 
either m gourville or m pellisson do you know any other friend of m fouquet i 
know m de la fontaine very well la fontaine the rhymester yes he used to write 
verses to my wife when m fouquet was one of our friends go to him then and try 
to procure an interview with the superintendent willingly but the sum on the 
day and hour when you arrange to settle the matter m vanel you shall be 
supplied with the money so do not make yourself uneasy on that account 
monseigneur such munificence you eclipse kings even you surpass m fouquet 
himself stay a moment do not let us mistake each other i do not make you a 
present of fourteen hundred thousand livres m vanel for i have children to 
provide for but i will lend you that sum ask whatever interest whatever 
security you please monseigneur i am quite ready and when all your requisitions 
are satisfied i will still repeat that you surpass kings and m fouquet in 
munificence what conditions do you impose the repayment in eight years and a 
mortgage upon the appointment itself certainly is that all wait a moment i 
reserve to myself the right of purchasing the post from you at one hundred and 
fifty thousand livres profit for yourself if in your mode of filling the office 
you do not follow out a line of conduct in conformity with the interests of the 
king and with my projects ah ah said vanel in a slightly altered tone is there 
anything in that which can possibly be objectionable to you m vanel said 
colbert coldly oh no no replied vanel quickly very good we will sign an 
agreement to that effect whenever you like and now go as quickly as you can to 
m fouquets friends and obtain an interview with the superintendent do not be 
too difficult in making whatever concessions may be required of you and when 
once the arrangements are all made i will press him to sign be most careful to 
do nothing of the kind do not speak of signatures with m fouquet nor of deeds 
nor even ask him to pass his word understand this otherwise you will lose 
everything all you have to do is to get m fouquet to give you his hand on the 
matter go go chapter iv an interview with the queen-mother the queen-mother was 
in her bedroom at the palais-royal with madame de motteville and the senora 
molina the king who had been impatiently expected the whole day had not made 
his appearance and the queen who had grown quite impatient had often sent to 
inquire about him the whole atmosphere of the court seemed to indicate an 
approaching storm the courtiers and the ladies of the court avoided meeting in 
the antechambers and the corridors in order not to converse on compromising 
subjects monsieur had joined the king early in the morning for a hunting-party 
madame remained in her own apartments cool and distant to every one and the 
queen-mother after she had said her prayers in latin talked of domestic matters 
with her two friends in pure castilian madame de motteville who understood the 
language perfectly answered her in french when the three ladies had exhausted 
every form of dissimulation and politeness to reach at last the charge that the 
kings conduct was causing grief to the queen and the queen-mother and all his 
family and when in guarded phrases they had fulminated every variety of 
imprecation against mademoiselle de la valliere the queen-mother terminated 
these recriminations by an exclamation indicative of her own reflections and 
character estos hijos said she to molina which means these children words full 
of meaning on a mothers lips words full of terrible significance in the mouth 
of a queen who like anne of austria hid many curious and dark secrets in her 
soul yes said molina these children for whom every mother becomes a sacrifice 
to whom replied the queen a mother has sacrificed everything anne did not 
finish her phrase for she fancied when she raised her eyes towards the 
full-length portrait of the pale louis xiii that light had once more flashed 
from her husbands dull eyes and that his nostrils were inflated by wrath the 
portrait became a living being it did not speak it threatened a profound 
silence succeeded the queens last remark la molina began to turn over the 
ribbons and lace of a large work-table madame de motteville surprised at the 
look of mutual intelligence which had been exchanged between the confidante and 
her mistress cast down her eyes like a discreet woman and pretending to be 
observant of nothing that was passing listened with the utmost attention she 
heard nothing however but a very significant hum on the part of the spanish 
duenna who was the image of circumspection and a profound sigh on the part of 
the queen she looked up immediately you are suffering she said no motteville no 
why do you say that your majesty just groaned you are right i do suffer a 
little m vallot is not far off i believe he is in madames apartment why is he 
with madame madame is troubled with nervous attacks a very fine disorder indeed 
said the queen m vallot is wrong in being there when another physician might 
cure madame madame de motteville looked up with an air of great surprise as she 
replied another doctor instead of m vallot who then occupation motteville 
occupation ah if any one is really ill it is my poor daughter and your majesty 
too less so this evening though do not believe that too confidently madame said 
de motteville as if to justify the caution a sharp pain seized the queen who 
turned deadly pale and threw herself back in the chair with every symptom of a 
sudden fainting-fit my drops she murmured ah ah replied molina who went without 
haste to a richly gilded tortoise-shell cabinet from which she took a large 
rock-crystal smelling-bottle and brought it open to the queen who inhaled from 
it wildly several times and murmured in that way the lord will kill me his holy 
will be done your majestys death is not so near at hand added molina replacing 
the smelling-bottle in the cabinet does your majesty feel better now inquired 
madame de motteville much better returned the queen placing her finger on her 
lips to impose silence on her favorite it is very strange remarked madame de 
motteville after a pause what is strange said the queen does your majesty 
remember the day when this pain attacked you for the first time i remember only 
that it was a grievously sad day for me motteville but your majesty had not 
always regarded that day as a sad one why because twenty-three years before on 
that very day his present majesty your own glorious son was born at the very 
same hour the queen uttered a loud cry buried her face in her hands and seemed 
utterly lost for some moments was it remembrance or reflection or was it grief 
la molina darted a look at madame de motteville almost furious in its 
reproachfulness the poor woman ignorant of its meaning was about to make 
inquiries in her own defence when suddenly anne of austria arose and said yes 
the th of september my sorrow began on the th of september the greatest joy one 
day the deepest sorrow the next the sorrow she added in a low voice the bitter 
expiation of a too excessive joy and from that moment anne of austria whose 
memory and reason seemed to have become entirely suspended for a time remained 
impenetrable with vacant look mind almost wandering and hands hanging heavily 
down as if life had almost departed we must put her to bed said la molina 
presently molina let us leave the queen alone added the spanish attendant 
madame de motteville rose large and glistening tears were fast rolling down the 
queens pallid face and molina having observed this sign of weakness fixed her 
vigilant black eyes upon her yes yes replied the queen leave us motteville go 
the word us produced a disagreeable effect upon the ears of the french favorite 
for it signified that an interchange of secrets or of revelations of the past 
was about to be made and that one person was de trop in the conversation which 
seemed likely to take place will molina be sufficient for your majesty to-night 
inquired the frenchwoman yes replied the queen madame de motteville bowed in 
submission and was about to withdraw when suddenly an old female attendant 
dressed as if she had belonged to the spanish court of the year opened the door 
and surprised the queen in her tears madame de motteville in her skilful 
retreat and molina in her strategy the remedy she cried delightedly to the 
queen as she unceremoniously approached the group what remedy chica said anne 
of austria for your majestys sufferings the former replied who brings it asked 
madame de motteville eagerly m vallot no a lady from flanders from flanders is 
she spanish inquired the queen i dont know who sent her m colbert her name she 
did not mention it her position in life she will answer that herself her face 
she is masked go molina go and see cried the queen it is needless suddenly 
replied a voice at once firm and gentle in its tone which proceeded from the 
other side of the tapestry hangings a voice which startled the attendants and 
made the queen tremble at the same moment a woman masked appeared between the 
curtains and before the queen could speak added i am connected with the order 
of the beguines of bruges and do indeed bring with me the remedy which is 
certain to effect a cure of your majestys complaint no one uttered a sound and 
the beguine did not move a step speak said the queen i will when we are alone 
was the answer anne of austria looked at her attendants who immediately 
withdrew the beguine thereupon advanced a few steps towards the queen and bowed 
reverently before her the queen gazed with increasing mistrust at this woman 
who in her turn fixed a pair of brilliant eyes upon the queen through openings 
in the mask the queen of france must indeed be very ill said anne of austria if 
it is known at the beguinage of bruges that she stands in need of being cured 
your majesty thank god is not ill beyond remedy but tell me how do you happen 
to know that i am suffering your majesty has friends in flanders and these 
friends have sent you yes madame name them to me impossible madame since your 
majestys memory has not been awakened by your heart anne of austria looked up 
endeavoring to discover through the concealment of the mask and through her 
mysterious language the name of this person who expressed herself with such 
familiarity and freedom then suddenly wearied by a curiosity at odds with her 
pride she said you are ignorant perhaps that royal personages are never spoken 
to with the face masked deign to excuse me madame replied the beguine humbly i 
cannot excuse you i will not forgive you if you do not throw your mask aside i 
have made a vow madame to go to the help of those who are afflicted or 
suffering without ever permitting them to behold my face i might have been able 
to administer some relief to your body and to your mind but since your majesty 
forbids me i will take my leave adieu madame adieu these words were uttered 
with a harmony of tone and respect of manner that destroyed the queens anger 
and suspicion but did not remove her feeling of curiosity you are right she 
said it ill becomes those who are suffering to reject the means of relief which 
heaven sends them speak then and may you indeed be able as you assert you are 
to administer relief to my body alas i think that god is about to make it 
suffer let us first speak a little of the mind if you please said the beguine 
of the mind which i am sure must also suffer my mind there are cancers so 
insidious in their nature that their very pulsation is invisible such cancers 
madame leave the ivory whiteness of the skin untouched and marble not the firm 
fair flesh with their blue tints the physician who bends over the patients 
chest hears not though he listens the insatiable teeth of the disease grinding 
its onward progress through the muscles as the blood flows freely on neither 
iron nor fire has ever destroyed or disarmed the rage of these mortal scourges 
their home is in the mind which they corrupt they grow in the heart until it 
breaks such madame are these other cancers fatal to queens are you free from 
these evils anne slowly raised her arm as dazzling in its perfect whiteness and 
as pure in its rounded outlines as it was in the time of her earlier days the 
evils to which you allude she said are the condition of the lives of the high 
in rank upon earth to whom heaven has imparted mind when those evils become too 
heavy to be borne the lord lightens their burden by penitence and confession 
thus we lay down our burden and the secrets which oppress us but forget not 
that the same sovereign lord apportions their trials to the strength of his 
creatures and my strength is not inferior to my burden for the secrets of 
others i have enough of the mercy of heaven for my own secrets not so much 
mercy as my confessor i find you madame as courageous as ever against your 
enemies i do not find you showing confidence in your friends queens have no 
friends if you have nothing further to say to me if you feel yourself inspired 
by heaven as a prophetess leave me i pray for i dread the future i should have 
supposed said the beguine resolutely that you would dread the past even more 
hardly had these words escaped the beguines lips when the queen rose proudly 
speak she cried in a short imperious tone of voice explain yourself briefly 
quickly entirely or else nay do not threaten me your majesty said the beguine 
gently i have come to you full of compassion and respect i have come on the 
part of a friend prove it then comfort instead of irritating me easily enough 
and your majesty will see who is friendly to you what misfortune has happened 
to your majesty during these twenty-three years past serious misfortunes indeed 
have i not lost the king i speak not of misfortunes of that kind i wish to ask 
you if since the birth of the king any indiscretion on a friends part has 
caused your majesty distress i do not understand you replied the queen setting 
her teeth hard together in order to conceal her emotion i will make myself 
understood then your majesty remembers that the king was born on the th of 
september at quarter-past eleven oclock yes stammered the queen at half-past 
twelve continued the beguine the dauphin who had been baptized by monseigneur 
de meaux in the kings and in your own presence was acknowledged as the heir of 
the crown of france the king then went to the chapel of the old chateau de st 
germain to hear the te deum chanted quite true quite true murmured the queen 
your majestys confinement took place in the presence of monsieur his majestys 
late uncle of the princes and of the ladies attached to the court the kings 
physician bouvard and honore the surgeon were stationed in the antechamber your 
majesty slept from three oclock until seven i believe yes yes but you tell me 
no more than every one else knows as well as you and myself i am now madame 
approaching that with which very few persons are acquainted very few persons 
did i say alas i might say two only for formerly there were but five in all and 
for many years past the secret has been assured by the deaths of the principal 
participators in it the late king sleeps now with his ancestors peronne the 
midwife soon followed him laporte is already forgotten the queen opened her 
lips as though about to reply she felt beneath her icy hand with which she 
touched her face the beads of perspiration upon her brow it was eight oclock 
pursued the beguine the king was seated at supper full of joy and happiness 
around him on all sides arose wild cries of delight and drinking of healths the 
people cheered beneath the balconies the swiss guards the musketeers and the 
royal guard wandered through the city borne about in triumph by the drunken 
students those boisterous sounds of the general joy disturbed the dauphin the 
future king of france who was quietly lying in the arms of madame de hausac his 
nurse and whose eyes when he should open them might have observed two crowns at 
the foot of his cradle suddenly your majesty uttered a piercing cry and dame 
peronne flew to your bedside the doctors were dining in a room at some distance 
from your chamber the palace abandoned in the general confusion was without 
either sentinels or guards the midwife having questioned and examined your 
majesty gave a sudden exclamation of surprise and taking you in her arms 
bewildered almost out of her senses from sheer distress of mind despatched 
laporte to inform the king that her majesty the queen wished to see him in her 
room laporte you are aware madame was a man of the most admirable calmness and 
presence of mind he did not approach the king as if he were the bearer of 
alarming intelligence and feeling his importance wished to inspire the terror 
which he himself experienced besides it was not a very terrifying intelligence 
which awaited the king at any rate laporte with a smile upon his lips 
approached the kings chair saying to him sire the queen is very happy and would 
be still more so to see your majesty on that day louis xiii would have given 
his crown away to the veriest beggar for a god bless you animated light-hearted 
and full of gayety the king rose from the table and said to those around him in 
a tone that henry iv might have used gentlemen i am going to see my wife he 
came to your bedside madame at the very moment when dame peronne presented to 
him a second prince as beautiful and healthy as the former and said sire heaven 
will not allow the kingdom of france to fall into the female line the king 
yielding to a first impulse clasped the child in his arms and cried oh heaven i 
thank thee at this part of her recital the beguine paused observing how 
intensely the queen was suffering she had thrown herself back in her chair and 
with her head bent forward and her eyes fixed listened without seeming to hear 
and her lips moved convulsively breathing either a prayer to heaven or 
imprecations against the woman before her ah do not believe that if there has 
been but one dauphin in france exclaimed the beguine if the queen allowed the 
second child to vegetate far from the throne do not believe that she was an 
unfeeling mother oh no no there are those who know the floods of bitter tears 
she shed there are those who have known and witnessed the passionate kisses she 
imprinted on that innocent creature in exchange for the life of misery and 
gloom to which state policy condemned the twin brother of louis xiv oh heaven 
murmured the queen feebly it is known continued the beguine quickly that when 
the king perceived the effect which would result from the existence of two sons 
both equal in age and pretensions he trembled for the welfare of france for the 
tranquillity of the state it is known that the cardinal de richelieu by the 
direction of louis xiii thought over the subject with deep attention and after 
an hours meditation in his majestys cabinet pronounced the following sentence a 
king is born to succeed his majesty god has sent another to succeed the first 
but at present we need only the first-born let us conceal the second from 
france as god has concealed him from his parents themselves one prince is peace 
and safety for the state two competitors are civil war and anarchy the queen 
rose suddenly from her seat pale as death her hands clinched together you know 
too much she said in a hoarse thick voice since you refer to secrets of state 
as for the friends from whom you have acquired this secret they are false and 
treacherous you are their accomplice in the crime which is now committed now 
throw aside your mask or i will have you arrested by my captain of the guards 
do not think that this secret terrifies me you have obtained it you shall 
restore it to me it will freeze in your bosom neither your secret nor your life 
belongs to you from this moment anne of austria joining gesture to the threat 
advanced two steps towards the beguine learn said the latter to know and value 
the fidelity the honor and the secrecy of the friends you have abandoned she 
then suddenly threw aside her mask madame de chevreuse exclaimed the queen with 
your majesty the sole living confidante of the secret ah murmured anne of 
austria come and embrace me duchess alas you kill your friend in thus trifling 
with her terrible distress the queen leaning her head upon the shoulder of the 
old duchess burst into a flood of bitter tears how young you are still said the 
latter in a hollow voice you can weep chapter v two friends the queen looked 
steadily at madame de chevreuse and said i believe you just now made use of the 
word happy in speaking of me hitherto duchess i had thought it impossible that 
a human creature could anywhere be found less happy than the queen of france 
your afflictions madame have indeed been terrible enough but by the side of 
those illustrious misfortunes to which we two old friends separated by mens 
malice were just now alluding you possess sources of pleasure slight enough in 
themselves it may be but which are greatly envied by the world what are they 
said anne of austria bitterly how can you use the word pleasure duchess you who 
just now admitted that my body and my mind both are in need of remedies madame 
de chevreuse collected herself for a moment and then murmured how far removed 
kings are from other people what do you mean i mean that they are so far 
removed from the vulgar herd that they forget that others ever stand in need of 
the bare necessaries of life they are like the inhabitant of the african 
mountain who gazing from the verdant table-land refreshed by the rills of 
melted snow cannot comprehend that the dwellers in the plains below him are 
perishing from hunger and thirst in the midst of their lands burned up by the 
heat of the sun the queen slightly colored for she now began to perceive the 
drift of her friends remark it was very wrong she said to have neglected you oh 
madame the king has inherited it is said the hatred his father bore me the king 
would dismiss me if he knew i were in the palais-royal i cannot say that the 
king is very well disposed towards you duchess replied the queen but i could 
secretly you know the duchesss disdainful smile produced a feeling of 
uneasiness in the queens mind duchess she hastened to add you did perfectly 
right to come here thanks madame even were it only to give us the happiness of 
contradicting the report of your death has it been said then that i was dead 
everywhere and yet my children did not go into mourning ah you know duchess the 
court is very frequently moving about from place to place we see the gentlemen 
of albert de luynes but seldom and many things escape our minds in the midst of 
the preoccupations which constantly engage us your majesty ought not to have 
believed the report of my death why not alas we are all mortal and you may 
perceive how rapidly i your younger sister as we used formerly to say am 
approaching the tomb if your majesty had believed me dead you ought to have 
been astonished not to have received any communication from me death not 
unfrequently takes us by surprise duchess oh your majesty those who are 
burdened with secrets such as we have just now discussed have always an urgent 
desire to divulge them which they must gratify before they die among the 
preparations for eternity is the task of putting ones papers in order the queen 
started your majesty will be sure to learn in a particular manner the day of my 
death why so because your majesty will receive the next day under several 
coverings everything connected with our mysterious correspondence of former 
times did you not burn it cried anne in alarm traitors only replied the duchess 
destroy a royal correspondence traitors do you say yes certainly or rather they 
pretend to destroy and keep or sell it the faithful on the contrary most 
carefully secrete such treasures for it may happen that some day or other they 
will wish to seek out their queen in order to say to her madame i am getting 
old my health is fast failing me for me there is danger of death for your 
majesty the danger that this secret may be revealed take therefore this 
dangerous paper and burn it yourself a dangerous paper what one so far as i am 
concerned i have but one it is true but that is indeed most dangerous in its 
nature oh duchess tell me tell me a letter dated tuesday the d of august in 
which you beg me to go to noisy-le-sec to see that unhappy child in your own 
handwriting madame there are those words that unhappy child a profound silence 
ensued the queens mind was wandering in the past madame de chevreuse was 
watching the progress of her scheme yes unhappy most unhappy murmured anne of 
austria how sad the existence he led poor child to finish it in so cruel a 
manner is he dead cried the duchess suddenly with a curiosity whose sincere 
accents the queen instinctively detected he died of consumption died forgotten 
died withered and blighted like the flowers a lover has given to his mistress 
which she leaves to die secreted in a drawer where she has hidden them from the 
world died repeated the duchess with an air of discouragement which would have 
afforded the queen the most unfeigned delight had it not been tempered in some 
measure by a mixture of doubt died at noisy-le-sec yes in the arms of his tutor 
a poor honest man who did not long survive him that can be easily understood it 
is so difficult to bear up under the weight of such a loss and such a secret 
said madame de chevreuse the irony of which reflection the queen pretended not 
to perceive madame de chevreuse continued well madame i inquired some years ago 
at noisy-le-sec about this unhappy child i was told that it was not believed he 
was dead and that was my reason for not at once condoling with your majesty oh 
certainly if i had believed it never should the slightest allusion to so 
deplorable an event have reawakened your majestys legitimate distress you say 
that it is not believed that the child died at noisy no madame what did they 
say about him then they said but no doubt they were mistaken nay speak speak 
they said that one evening about the year a lady beautiful and majestic in her 
bearing which was observed notwithstanding the mask and the mantle which 
concealed her figure a lady of rank of very high rank no doubt came in a 
carriage to the place where the road branches off the very same spot you know 
where i awaited news of the young prince when your majesty was pleased to send 
me there well well that the boys tutor or guardian took the child to this lady 
well what next that both the child and his tutor left that part of the country 
the very next day there you see there is some truth in what you relate since in 
point of fact the poor child died from a sudden attack of illness which up to 
the age of seven years makes the lives of all children as doctors say suspended 
as it were by a thread what your majesty says is quite true no one knows it 
better than you no one believes it more than myself but yet how strange it is 
what can it now be thought the queen the person who gave me these details who 
had been sent to inquire after the childs health did you confide such a charge 
to any one else oh duchess some one as dumb as your majesty as dumb as myself 
we will suppose it was myself madame this some one some months after passing 
through touraine touraine recognized both the tutor and the child too i am 
wrong he thought he recognized them both living cheerful happy and flourishing 
the one in a green old age the other in the flower of his youth judge after 
that what truth can be attributed to the rumors which are circulated or what 
faith after that can be placed in anything that may happen in the world but i 
am fatiguing your majesty it was not my intention however to do so and i will 
take my leave of you after renewing to you the assurance of my most respectful 
devotion stay duchess let us first talk a little about yourself of myself 
madame i am not worthy that you should bend your looks upon me why not indeed 
are you not the oldest friend i have are you angry with me duchess i indeed 
what motive could i have if i had reason to be angry with your majesty should i 
have come here duchess age is fast creeping on us both we should be united 
against that death whose approach threatens us you overpower me madame with the 
kindness of your language no one has ever loved or served me as you have done 
duchess your majesty remembers it always duchess give me a proof of your 
friendship ah madame my whole being is devoted to your majesty the proof i 
require is that you should ask something of me ask oh i know you well no one is 
more disinterested more noble more truly royal do not praise me too highly 
madame said the duchess becoming uneasy i could never praise you as much as you 
deserve to be praised and yet age and misfortune effect a great change in 
people madame so much the better for the beautiful the haughty the adored 
duchess of former days might have answered me ungratefully i do not wish for 
anything from you blessed be misfortunes if they have come to you since they 
will have changed you and you will now perhaps answer me i accept the duchesss 
look and smile became more gentle she was under the charm and no longer 
concealed her wishes speak dearest said the queen what do you want i must first 
explain to you do so unhesitatingly well then your majesty can confer on me a 
pleasure unspeakable a pleasure incomparable what is it said the queen a little 
distant in her manner from an uneasiness of feeling produced by this remark but 
do not forget my good chevreuse that i am quite as much under my sons influence 
as i was formerly under my husbands i will not be too hard madame call me as 
you used to do it will be a sweet echo of our happy youth well then my dear 
mistress my darling anne do you know spanish still yes ask me in spanish then 
here it is will your majesty do me the honor to pass a few days with me at 
dampierre is that all said the queen stupefied yes nothing more than that good 
heavens can you possibly imagine that in asking you that i am not asking you 
the greatest conceivable favor if that really be the case you do not know me 
will you accept yes gladly and i shall be happy continued the queen with some 
suspicion if my presence can in any way be useful to you useful exclaimed the 
duchess laughing oh no no agreeable delicious delightful yes a thousand times 
yes you promise me then i swear it said the queen whereupon the duchess seized 
her beautiful hand and covered it with kisses the queen could not help 
murmuring to herself she is a good-hearted woman and very generous too will 
your majesty consent to wait a fortnight before you come certainly but why 
because said the duchess knowing me to be in disgrace no one would lend me the 
hundred thousand crowns which i require to put dampierre in a state of repair 
but when it is known that i require that sum for the purpose of receiving your 
majesty at dampierre properly all the money in paris will be at my disposal ah 
said the queen gently nodding her head with an air of intelligence a hundred 
thousand crowns you want a hundred thousand crowns to put dampierre into repair 
quite as much as that and no one will lend them to you no one i will lend them 
to you if you like duchess oh i shouldnt dare to accept you would be wrong if 
you did not besides a hundred thousand crowns is really not much i know but too 
well that your discreetness has never been properly acknowledged push that 
table a little towards me duchess and i will write you an order on m colbert no 
on m fouquet who is a far more courteous and obliging man will he pay it if he 
will not pay it i will but it will be the first time he will have refused me 
the queen wrote and handed the duchess the order and afterwards dismissed her 
with a warm and cheerful embrace chapter vi how jean de la fontaine wrote his 
first tale all these intrigues are exhausted the human mind so complicated in 
its exhibitions has developed itself freely in the three outlines which our 
recital has afforded it is not unlikely that in the future we are now preparing 
politics and intrigues may still appear but the springs by which they work will 
be so carefully concealed that no one will be able to see aught but flowers and 
paintings just as at a theatre where a colossus appears upon the scene walking 
along moved by the small legs and slender arms of a child concealed within the 
framework we now return to st mande where the superintendent was in the habit 
of receiving his select society of epicureans for some time past the host had 
been severely tried every one in the house was aware of and felt the ministers 
distress no more magnificent and recklessly improvident reunions finance had 
been the pretext assigned by fouquet and never was any pretext as gourville 
wittily said more fallacious for there was not the slightest appearance of 
money m vatel was most resolutely painstaking in keeping up the reputation of 
the house and yet the gardeners who supplied the kitchens complained of a 
ruinous delay the agents for the supply of spanish wines frequently sent drafts 
which no one honored fishermen whom the superintendent engaged on the coast of 
normandy calculated that if they were paid all that was due to them the amount 
would enable them to retire comfortably for the rest of their lives fish which 
at a later period was to be the cause of vatels death did not arrive at all 
however on the ordinary day of reception fouquets friends flocked in more 
numerously than ever gourville and the abbe fouquet talked over money matters 
that is to say the abbe borrowed a few pistoles from gourville pellisson seated 
with his legs crossed was engaged in finishing the peroration of a speech with 
which fouquet was to open the parliament and this speech was a masterpiece 
because pellisson wrote it for his friend that is to say he inserted everything 
in it which the latter would most certainly never have taken the trouble to say 
of his own accord presently loret and la fontaine would enter from the garden 
engaged in a dispute upon the facility of making verses the painters and 
musicians in their turn also were hovering near the dining-room as soon as 
eight oclock struck the supper would be announced for the superintendent never 
kept any one waiting it was already half-past seven and the guests were in good 
appetite as soon as all the guests were assembled gourville went straight up to 
pellisson awoke him out of his reverie and led him into the middle of a room 
the doors of which he had closed well he said anything new pellisson raised his 
intelligent and gentle face and said i have borrowed twenty-five thousand 
livres of my aunt and i have them here in good money good replied gourville we 
want only one hundred and ninety-five thousand livres for the first payment the 
payment of what asked la fontaine what absent-minded as usual why it was you 
who told us that the small estate at corbeil was going to be sold by one of m 
fouquets creditors and you also who proposed that all his friends should 
subscribe more than that too it was you who said that you would sell a corner 
of your house at chateau-thierry in order to furnish your own proportion and 
now you come and ask the payment of what this remark was received with a 
general laugh which made la fontaine blush i beg your pardon he said i had not 
forgotten it oh no only only you remembered nothing about it replied loret that 
is the truth and the fact is he is quite right there is a great difference 
between forgetting and not remembering well then added pellisson you bring your 
mite in the shape of the price of the piece of land you have sold sold no and 
have you not sold the field then inquired gourville in astonishment for he knew 
the poets disinterestedness my wife would not let me replied the latter at 
which there were fresh bursts of laughter and yet you went to chateau-thierry 
for that purpose said some one certainly i did and on horseback poor fellow i 
had eight different horses and i was almost jolted to death you are an 
excellent fellow and you rested yourself when you arrived there rested oh of 
course i did for i had an immense deal of work to do how so my wife had been 
flirting with the man to whom i wished to sell the land the fellow drew back 
from his bargain and so i challenged him very good and you fought it seems not 
you know nothing about it i suppose no my wife and her relations interfered in 
the matter i was kept a quarter of an hour with my sword in my hand but i was 
not wounded and the adversary neither was the adversary for he never came on to 
the field capital cried his friends from all sides you must have been terribly 
angry exceedingly so i had caught cold i returned home and then my wife began 
to quarrel with me in real earnest yes in real earnest she threw a loaf of 
bread at my head a large loaf and what did you do oh i upset the table over her 
and her guests and then i got upon my horse again and here i am every one had 
great difficulty in keeping his countenance at the relation of this tragic 
comedy and when the laughter had somewhat ceased one of the guests present said 
to him is that all you have brought us back oh no i have an excellent idea in 
my head what is it have you noticed that there is a good deal of sportive 
jesting poetry written in france yes of course replied every one and pursued la 
fontaine only a very small portion of it is printed the laws are strict you 
know that may be but a rare article is a dear article and that is the reason 
why i have written a small poem extremely licentious oh oh dear poet extremely 
obscene oh oh extremely cynical oh the devil yes continued the poet with cold 
indifference i have introduced in it the greatest freedom of language i could 
possibly employ peals of laughter again broke forth while the poet was thus 
announcing the quality of his wares and he continued i have tried to exceed 
everything that boccaccio aretino and other masters of their craft have written 
in the same style good god cried pellisson it will be condemned do you think so 
said la fontaine simply i assure you i did not do it on my own account so much 
as on m fouquets this wonderful conclusion raised the mirth of all present to a 
climax and i have sold the first edition of this little book for eight hundred 
livres exclaimed la fontaine rubbing his hands together serious and religious 
books sell at about half that rate it would have been better said gourville 
laughing to have written two religious books instead it would have been too 
long and not amusing enough replied la fontaine tranquilly my eight hundred 
livres are in this little bag i offer them as my contribution as he said this 
he placed his offering in the hands of their treasurer it was then lorets turn 
who gave a hundred and fifty livres the others stripped themselves in the same 
way and the total sum in the purse amounted to forty thousand livres never did 
more generous coins rattle in the divine balances in which charity weighs good 
hearts and good intentions against the counterfeit coin of devout hypocrites 
the money was still being counted over when the superintendent noiselessly 
entered the room he had heard everything this man who had possessed so many 
millions who had exhausted all pleasures and all honors this generous heart 
this inexhaustible brain fouquet who had like two burning crucibles devoured 
the material and moral substance of the first kingdom in the world crossed the 
threshold with his eyes filled with tears and passed his white and slender 
fingers through the gold and silver poor offering he said in a tone tender and 
filled with emotion you will disappear in the smallest corner of my empty purse 
but you have filled to overflowing that which nothing can ever exhaust my heart 
thank you my friends thank you and as he could not embrace everyone present all 
were weeping a little philosophers though they were he embraced la fontaine 
saying to him poor fellow so you have on my account been beaten by your wife 
and damned by your confessor oh it is a mere nothing replied the poet if your 
creditors will only wait a couple of years i shall have written a hundred other 
tales which at two editions each will pay off the debt chapter vii la fontaine 
as a negotiator fouquet pressed la fontaines hand most warmly saying to him my 
dear poet write a hundred other tales not only for the eighty pistoles which 
each of them will produce you but still more to enrich our language with a 
hundred other masterpieces oh oh said la fontaine with a little air of pride 
you must not suppose that i have brought only this idea and the eighty pistoles 
to the superintendent oh indeed was the general acclamation from all parts of 
the room m de la fontaine is in funds to-day heaven bless the idea if it brings 
me one or two millions said fouquet gayly exactly replied la fontaine quick 
quick cried the assembly take care said pellisson in la fontaines ear you have 
had a most brilliant success up to the present moment do not go too far not at 
all m pellisson and you who are a man of taste will be the first to approve of 
what i have done is it a matter of millions said gourville i have fifteen 
hundred thousand livres here m gourville he replied striking himself on the 
chest the deuce take this gascon from chateau-thierry cried loret it is not the 
pocket you should touch but the brain said fouquet stay a moment monsieur the 
superintendent added la fontaine you are not procureur-general you are a poet 
true true cried loret conrart and every person present connected with 
literature you are i repeat a poet and a painter a sculptor a friend of the 
arts and sciences but acknowledge that you are no lawyer oh i do acknowledge it 
replied m fouquet smiling if you were to be nominated at the academy you would 
refuse i think i think i should with all due deference to the academicians very 
good if therefore you do not wish to belong to the academy why do you allow 
yourself to form one of the parliament oh oh said pellisson we are talking 
politics i wish to know persisted la fontaine whether the barristers gown does 
or does not become m fouquet there is no question of the gown at all retorted 
pellisson annoyed at the laughter of the company on the contrary the gown is in 
question said loret take the gown away from the procureur-general said conrart 
and we have m fouquet left us still of whom we have no reason to complain but 
as he is no procureur-general without his gown we agree with m de la fontaine 
and pronounce the gown to be nothing but a bugbear fugiunt risus leporesque 
said loret the smiles and the graces said some one present that is not the way 
said pellisson gravely that i translate lepores how do you translate it said la 
fontaine thus the hares run away as soon as they see m fouquet a burst of 
laughter in which the superintendent joined followed this sally but why hares 
objected conrart vexed because the hare will be the very one who will not be 
over-pleased to see m fouquet retaining the elements of strength which belong 
to his parliamentary position oh oh murmured the poets quo non ascendam said 
conrart would seem to me impossible with a procureurs gown and it seems so to 
me without that gown said the obstinate pellisson what is your opinion 
gourville i think the gown in question is a very good thing replied the latter 
but i equally think that a million and a half is far better than the gown and i 
am of gourvilles opinion exclaimed fouquet stopping the discussion by the 
expression of his own opinion which would necessarily bear down all the others 
a million and a half pellisson grumbled out now i happen to know an indian 
fable tell it to me said la fontaine i ought to know it too tell it tell it 
said the others there was a tortoise which was as usual well protected by its 
shell said pellisson whenever its enemies threatened it it took refuge within 
its covering one day some one said to it you must feel very hot in such a house 
as that in the summer and you are altogether prevented from showing off your 
graces here is a snake who will give you a million and a half for your shell 
good said the superintendent laughing well what next said la fontaine much more 
interested in the apologue than in its moral the tortoise sold his shell and 
remained naked and defenceless a vulture happened to see him and being hungry 
broke the tortoises back with a blow of his beak and devoured it the moral is 
that m fouquet should take very good care to keep his gown la fontaine 
understood the moral seriously you forget aeschylus he said to his adversary 
what do you mean aeschylus was bald-headed and a vulture your vulture probably 
who was a great lover of tortoises mistook at a distance his head for a block 
of stone and let a tortoise which was shrunk up in his shell fall upon it yes 
yes la fontaine is right resumed fouquet who had become very thoughtful 
whenever a vulture wishes to devour a tortoise he well knows how to break his 
shell and but too happy is that tortoise to which a snake pays a million and a 
half for his envelope if any one were to bring me a generous-hearted snake like 
the one in your fable pellisson i would give him my shell rara avis in terris 
cried conrart and like a black swan is he not added la fontaine well then the 
bird in question black and very rare is already found do you mean to say that 
you have found a purchaser for my post of procureur-general exclaimed fouquet i 
have monsieur but the superintendent has never said that he wished to sell 
resumed pellisson i beg your pardon said conrart you yourself spoke about it 
yes i am a witness to that said gourville he seems very tenacious about his 
brilliant idea said fouquet laughing well la fontaine who is the purchaser a 
perfect black bird a counsellor belonging to the parliament an excellent fellow 
what is his name vanel vanel exclaimed fouquet vanel the husband of precisely 
her husband yes monsieur poor fellow said fouquet with an expression of great 
interest he wishes to be procureur-general he wishes to be everything that you 
have been monsieur said gourville and to do everything that you have done it is 
very agreeable tell us all about it la fontaine it is very simple i see him 
occasionally and a short time ago i met him walking about on the place de la 
bastille at the very moment when i was about to take the small carriage to come 
down here to st mande he must have been watching his wife interrupted loret oh 
no said la fontaine he is far from being jealous he accosted me embraced me and 
took me to the inn called limage-saint-fiacre and told me all about his 
troubles he has his troubles then yes his wife wants to make him ambitious well 
and he told you that some one had spoken to him about a post in parliament that 
m fouquets name had been mentioned that ever since madame vanel dreams of 
nothing else but being called madame the procureuse-generale and that she is 
dying of it every night she is not dreaming of it the deuce poor woman said 
fouquet wait a moment conrart is always telling me that i do not know how to 
conduct matters of business you will see how i manage this one well go on i 
suppose you know said i to vanel that the value of a post such as that which m 
fouquet holds is by no means trifling how much do you imagine it to be he said 
m fouquet i know has refused seventeen hundred thousand livres my wife replied 
vanel had estimated it at about fourteen hundred thousand ready money i asked 
yes she has sold some property of hers in guienne and has received the 
purchase-money thats a pretty sum to touch all at once said the abbe fouquet 
who had not hitherto said a word poor madame vanel murmured fouquet pellisson 
shrugged his shoulders a fiend he said in a low voice to fouquet that may be it 
would be delightful to make use of this fiends money to repair the injury which 
an angel has done herself for me pellisson looked with a surprised air at 
fouquet whose thoughts were from that moment fixed upon a fresh object well 
inquired la fontaine what about my negotiation admirable my dear poet yes said 
gourville but there are some persons who are anxious to have the steed who have 
not money enough to pay for the bridle and vanel would draw back from his offer 
if he were to be taken at his word continued the abbe fouquet i do not believe 
it said la fontaine what do you know about it why you have not yet heard the 
denouement of my story if there is a denouement why do you beat about the bush 
so much semper ad adventum is that correct said fouquet with the air of a 
nobleman who condescends to barbarisms the latinists clapped their hands my 
denouement cried la fontaine is that vanel that determined black bird knowing 
that i was coming to st mande implored me to bring him with me and if possible 
to present him to m fouquet so that so that he is here i left him in that part 
of the grounds called bel-air well m fouquet what is your reply well it is not 
fitting that the husband of madame vanel should catch cold on my grounds send 
for him la fontaine since you know where he is i will go myself and i will 
accompany you said the abbe fouquet i can carry the money-bags no jesting said 
fouquet seriously let the business be a serious one if it is to be one at all 
but first of all let us be hospitable make my apologies la fontaine to that 
gentleman and tell him that i am distressed to have kept him waiting but that i 
was not aware he was there la fontaine set off at once fortunately accompanied 
by gourville for absorbed in his own calculations the poet would have mistaken 
the route and was hurrying as fast as he could towards the village of st maur 
within a quarter of an hour afterwards m vanel was introduced into the 
superintendents cabinet the description and details of which have already been 
given at the beginning of this history when fouquet saw him enter he called 
pellisson and whispered a few words in his ear do not lose a word of what i am 
going to say let all the silver and gold plate together with the jewels of 
every description be packed up in the carriage you will take the black horses 
the jeweller will accompany you and you will postpone the supper until madame 
de bellieres arrival will it be necessary to notify madame de belliere said 
pellisson no that will be useless i will do that very well go my friend 
pellisson set off not quite clear as to his friends meaning or intention but 
confident like every true friend in the judgment of the man he was blindly 
obeying it is that which constitutes the strength of such men distrust is 
awakened only by inferior natures vanel bowed low to the superintendent and was 
about to begin a speech be seated monsieur said fouquet politely i am told that 
you wish to purchase a post i hold how much can you give me for it it is for 
you monseigneur to fix the price i know that offers of purchase have already 
been made to you for it madame vanel i have been told values it at fourteen 
hundred thousand livres that is all we have can you give me the money 
immediately i have not the money with me said vanel frightened almost by the 
unpretending simplicity amounting to greatness of the man for he had expected 
disputes and difficulties and opposition of every kind when will you be able to 
have it whenever you please monseigneur and he began to be afraid that fouquet 
was trifling with him if it were not for the trouble you would have in 
returning to paris i would say at once but we will arrange that the payment and 
the signature shall take place at six oclock to-morrow morning very good said 
vanel as cold as ice and feeling quite bewildered adieu m vanel present my 
humblest respects to madame vanel said fouquet as he rose upon which vanel who 
felt the blood rushing up to his head for he was quite confounded by his 
success said seriously to the superintendent will you give me your word 
monseigneur upon this affair fouquet turned round his head saying pardieu and 
you monsieur vanel hesitated trembled all over and at last finished by 
hesitatingly holding out his hand fouquet opened and nobly extended his own 
this loyal hand lay for a moment in vanels moist hypocritical palm and he 
pressed it in his own in order the better to convince himself the 
superintendent gently disengaged his hand as he again said adieu vanel then ran 
hastily to the door hurried along the vestibules and fled chapter viii madame 
de bellieres plate and diamonds hardly had fouquet dismissed vanel than he 
began to reflect for a few moments a man never can do too much for the woman he 
has once loved marguerite wishes to be the wife of a procureur-general and why 
not confer this pleasure upon her and now that the most scrupulous and 
sensitive conscience will be unable to reproach me with anything let my 
thoughts be bestowed on the woman who loves me madame de belliere ought to be 
there by this time and he turned towards the secret door after fouquet had 
locked himself in he opened the subterranean passage and rapidly hastened 
towards the means of communicating between the house at vincennes and his own 
residence he had neglected to apprise his friend of his approach by ringing the 
bell perfectly assured that she would never fail to be exact at the rendezvous 
in fact the marchioness had arrived and was waiting the noise the 
superintendent made aroused her she ran to take from under the door the letter 
which he had thrust there and which simply said come marchioness we are waiting 
supper for you with her heart filled with happiness madame de belliere ran to 
her carriage in the avenue de vincennes in a few minutes she was holding out 
her hand to gourville who was standing at the entrance where in order the 
better to please his master he had stationed himself to watch her arrival she 
had not observed that fouquets black horses had arrived at the same time 
smoking and covered with foam having returned to st mande with pellisson and 
the very jeweller to whom madame de belliere had sold her plate and her jewels 
pellisson introduced the goldsmith into the cabinet which fouquet had not yet 
left the superintendent thanked him for having been good enough to regard as a 
simple deposit in his hands the valuable property which he had had every right 
to sell he cast his eyes on the total of the account which amounted to thirteen 
hundred thousand livres then going to his desk he wrote an order for fourteen 
hundred thousand livres payable at sight at his treasury before twelve oclock 
the next day a hundred thousand livres profit cried the goldsmith oh 
monseigneur what generosity nay nay not so monsieur said fouquet touching him 
on the shoulder there are certain kindnesses which can never be repaid the 
profit is about that which you would have made but the interest of your money 
still remains to be arranged and saying this he unfastened from his sleeve a 
diamond button which the goldsmith himself had often valued at three thousand 
pistoles take this he said to the goldsmith in remembrance of me and farewell 
you are an honest man and you monseigneur cried the goldsmith completely 
overcome are a grand nobleman fouquet let the worthy goldsmith pass out of the 
room by a secret door and then went to receive madame de belliere who was 
already surrounded by all the guests the marchioness was always beautiful but 
now her loveliness was dazzling do you not think gentlemen said fouquet that 
madame is incomparably beautiful this evening and do you happen to know why 
because madame is the most beautiful of women said some one no but because she 
is the best and yet yet said the marchioness smiling and yet all the jewels 
which madame is wearing this evening are nothing but false stones she blushed 
oh oh exclaimed all the guests that can very well be said of one who has the 
finest diamonds in paris well said fouquet to pellisson in a low tone well at 
last i have understood you returned the latter and you have done well that is 
pleasant said the superintendent with a smile supper is ready monseigneur said 
vatel with majestic air and tone the crowd of guests hurried more rapidly than 
is customary at ministerial entertainments towards the banqueting-room where a 
magnificent spectacle presented itself upon the buffets upon the side-tables 
upon the supper-table itself in the midst of flowers and light glittered most 
dazzlingly the richest and most costly gold and silver plate that was ever seen 
relics of those ancient magnificent productions which the florentine artists 
whom the medici family had patronized had sculptured chased and cast for the 
purpose of holding flowers at a time when gold yet existed in france these 
hidden marvels which had been buried during the civil wars had timidly 
reappeared during the intervals of that war of good taste called the fronde 
when noblemen fighting against noblemen killed but did not pillage one another 
all that plate had madame de bellieres arms engraved upon it look cried la 
fontaine here is a p and a b but the most remarkable object present was the 
cover which fouquet had assigned to the marchioness near her was a pyramid of 
diamonds sapphires emeralds antique cameos sardonyx stones carved by the old 
greeks of asia minor with mountings of mysian gold curious mosaics of ancient 
alexandria mounted in silver and massive egyptian bracelets lay heaped up in a 
large plate of palissy ware supported by a tripod of gilt bronze which had been 
sculptured by benvenuto the marchioness turned pale as she recognized what she 
had never expected to see again a profound silence seemed to seize upon every 
one of the restless and excited guests fouquet did not even make a sign in 
dismissal of the richly liveried servants who crowded like bees round the huge 
buffets and other tables in the room gentlemen he said all this plate which you 
behold once belonged to madame de belliere who having observed one of her 
friends in great distress sent all this gold and silver together with the heap 
of jewels now before her to her goldsmith this noble conduct of a devoted 
friend can well be understood by such friends as you happy indeed is that man 
who sees himself loved in such a manner let us drink to the health of madame de 
belliere a tremendous burst of applause followed his words and made poor madame 
de belliere sink back dumb and breathless on her seat and then added pellisson 
whom all nobleness aroused and all beauty charmed let us also drink to the 
health of him who inspired madames noble conduct for such a man is worthy of 
being worthily loved it was now the marchionesss turn she rose pale and smiling 
and as she held out her glass with a faltering hand and her trembling fingers 
touched those of fouquet her look full of love found its reflection and 
response in that of her ardent and generous-hearted lover begun in this manner 
the supper soon became a fete no one sought for wit because no one was without 
it la fontaine forgot his gorgny wine and allowed vatel to reconcile him to the 
wines of the rhone and those from the shores of spain the abbe fouquet became 
so good-natured that gourville said to him take care monsieur the abbe if you 
are so tender you will be eaten the hours passed away so joyously that contrary 
to his usual custom the superintendent did not leave the table before the end 
of the dessert he smiled upon his friends delighted as a man is whose heart 
becomes intoxicated before his head and for the first time he looked at the 
clock suddenly a carriage rolled into the courtyard and strange to say it was 
heard high above the noise of the mirth which prevailed fouquet listened 
attentively and then turned his eyes towards the antechamber it seemed as if he 
could hear a step passing across it and as if this step instead of touching the 
ground pressed upon his heart involuntarily his foot parted company with the 
foot which madame de belliere had rested on his for two hours m dherblay bishop 
of vannes the usher announced and aramiss grave and thoughtful face appeared in 
the door-way between the remains of two garlands the thread of which the flame 
of a lamp had just burned chapter ix m de mazarins receipt fouquet would have 
uttered an exclamation of delight on seeing another friend arrive if the cold 
air and constrained appearance of aramis had not restored all his reserve are 
you going to join us at our dessert he asked and yet you would be frightened 
perhaps at the noise we madcaps are making monseigneur replied aramis 
respectfully i will begin by begging you to excuse me for having interrupted 
this merry meeting and then i will beg you to give me after your pleasure a 
moments audience on matters of business as the word business had aroused the 
attention of some of the epicureans present fouquet rose saying business first 
of all m dherblay we are too happy when matters of business arrive only at the 
end of a meal as he said this fouquet took the hand of madame de belliere who 
looked at him with a kind of uneasiness and then led her to an adjoining salon 
after having recommended her to the most reasonable of his guests and then 
taking aramis by the arm the superintendent led him towards his cabinet aramis 
on reaching the cabinet forgot respect and etiquette he threw himself into a 
chair saying guess whom i have seen this evening my dear chevalier every time 
you begin in that manner i am sure to hear you announce something disagreeable 
well and this time you will not be mistaken either my dear friend replied 
aramis do not keep me in suspense added the superintendent phlegmatically well 
then i have seen madame de chevreuse the old duchess do you mean yes her ghost 
perhaps no no the old she-wolf herself without teeth possibly but not without 
claws well what harm can she meditate against me i am no miser with women who 
are not prudes generosity is a quality that is always prized even by the woman 
who no longer dares to provoke love madame de chevreuse knows very well that 
you are not avaricious since she wishes to draw some money out of you indeed 
under what pretext oh pretexts are never wanting with her let me tell you what 
hers is it seems that the duchess has a good many letters of m de mazarins in 
her possession i am not surprised at that for the prelate was gallant enough 
yes but these letters have nothing whatever to do with the prelates 
love-affairs they concern it is said financial matters and accordingly they are 
less interesting do you not suspect what i mean not at all you have never heard 
that there was a charge of embezzlement yes a hundred nay a thousand times 
since i have been engaged in public matters i have hardly heard anything else 
but that just as in your own case when you a bishop are charged with impiety or 
a musketeer with cowardice the very thing of which they are always accusing 
ministers of finance is the embezzlement of public funds very good but let us 
specify for according to the duchess m de mazarin specifies let us see what he 
specifies something like a sum of thirteen million livres the disposal of which 
it would be very embarrassing for you to disclose thirteen millions said the 
superintendent stretching himself in his arm-chair in order to enable him the 
more comfortably to look up towards the ceiling thirteen millions i am trying 
to remember them out of all those i have been accused of stealing do not laugh 
my dear monsieur it is serious it is certain that the duchess has certain 
letters in her possession and these letters must be genuine since she wished to 
sell them to me for five hundred thousand livres oh one can have a very 
tolerable calumny for such a sum as that replied fouquet ah now i know what you 
mean and he began to laugh heartily so much the better said aramis a little 
reassured i remember the story of those thirteen millions now yes yes i 
remember them quite well i am delighted to hear it tell me about them well then 
one day signor mazarin heaven rest his soul made a profit of thirteen millions 
upon a concession of lands in the valtelline he cancelled them in the registry 
of receipts sent them to me and then made me advance them to him for war 
expenses very good then there is no doubt of their proper disbursement no the 
cardinal placed them under my name and gave me a receipt you have the receipt 
of course said fouquet as he quietly rose from his chair and went to his large 
ebony bureau inlaid with mother-of-pearl and gold what i most admire in you 
said aramis with an air of great satisfaction is your memory in the first place 
then your self-possession and finally the perfect order which prevails with you 
you a poet par excellence yes said fouquet i am orderly out of a spirit of 
idleness to save myself the trouble of looking after things and so i know that 
mazarins receipt is in the third drawer under the letter m i open the drawer 
and place my hand upon the very paper i need in the night without a light i 
could find it and with a confident hand he felt the bundle of papers which were 
piled up in the open drawer nay more than that he continued i remember the 
paper as if i saw it it is thick somewhat crumpled with gilt edges mazarin had 
made a blot upon the figure of the date ah he said the paper knows we are 
talking about it and that we want it very much and so it hides itself out of 
the way as the superintendent looked into the drawer aramis rose from his seat 
this is very singular said fouquet your memory is treacherous my dear 
monseigneur look in another drawer fouquet took out the bundle of papers and 
turned them over once more he then became very pale dont confine your search to 
that drawer said aramis look elsewhere quite useless i have never made a 
mistake no one but myself arranges any papers of mine of this nature no one but 
myself ever opens this drawer of which besides no one but myself is aware of 
the secret what do you conclude then said aramis agitated that mazarins receipt 
has been stolen from me madame de chevreuse was right chevalier i have 
appropriated the public funds i have robbed the state coffers of thirteen 
millions of money i am a thief m dherblay nay nay do not get irritated do not 
get excited and why not chevalier surely there is every reason for it if the 
legal proceedings are well arranged and a judgment is given in accordance with 
them your friend the superintendent can follow to montfaucon his colleague 
enguerrand de marigny and his predecessor samblancay oh said aramis smiling not 
so fast and why not why not so fast what do you suppose madame de chevreuse 
will have done with those letters for you refused them i suppose yes at once i 
suppose that she went and sold them to m colbert well i said i supposed so i 
might have said i was sure of it for i had her followed and when she left me 
she returned to her own house went out by a back door and proceeded straight to 
the intendants house in the rue croix-des-petits-champs legal proceedings will 
be instituted then scandal and dishonor will follow and all will fall upon me 
like a thunderbolt blindly harshly pitilessly aramis approached fouquet who sat 
trembling in his chair close to the open drawers he placed his hand on his 
shoulder and in an affectionate tone of voice said do not forget that the 
position of m fouquet can in no way be compared to that of samblancay or of 
marigny and why not in heavens name because the proceedings against those 
ministers were determined completed and the sentence carried out while in your 
case the same thing cannot take place another blow why not a peculator is under 
any circumstances a criminal those criminals who know how to find a safe asylum 
are never in danger what make my escape fly no i do not mean that you forget 
that all such proceedings originate in the parliament that they are instituted 
by the procureur-general and that you are the procureur-general you see that 
unless you wish to condemn yourself oh cried fouquet suddenly dashing his fist 
upon the table well what what is the matter i am procureur-general no longer 
aramis at this reply became as livid as death he pressed his hands together 
convulsively and with a wild haggard look which almost annihilated fouquet said 
laying a stress upon every syllable you are procureur-general no longer do you 
say no since when since four or five hours ago take care interrupted aramis 
coldly i do not think you are in full possession of your senses my friend 
collect yourself i tell you returned fouquet that a little while ago some one 
came to me brought by my friends to offer me fourteen hundred thousand livres 
for the appointment and that i have sold it aramis looked as if he had been 
thunder-stricken the intelligent and mocking expression of his countenance was 
changed to an expression of gloom and terror which had more effect upon the 
superintendent than all the exclamations and speeches in the world you had need 
of money then he said at last yes to discharge a debt of honor and in a few 
words he gave aramis an account of madame de la bellieres generosity and of the 
manner in which he had thought he ought to repay that generosity yes said 
aramis that is indeed a fine trait what has it cost exactly the fourteen 
hundred thousand livres the price of my appointment which you received in that 
manner without reflection oh imprudent friend i have not yet received the 
amount but i shall to-morrow it is not yet completed then it must be carried 
out though for i have given the goldsmith for twelve oclock to-morrow an order 
upon my treasury into which the purchasers money will be paid at six or seven 
oclock heaven be praised cried aramis clapping his hands together nothing is 
yet completed since you have not been paid but the goldsmith you shall receive 
the fourteen hundred thousand livres from me at a quarter before twelve stay a 
moment it is at six oclock this very morning that i am to sign oh i tell you 
that you will not sign i have given my word chevalier if you have given it you 
will take it back again that is all ah what are you saying to me cried fouquet 
in a most expressive tone fouquet recall his word after it has been once 
pledged aramis replied to the almost stern look of the minister with a look 
full of anger monsieur he said i believe i have deserved to be called a man of 
honor have i not as a soldier i have risked my life five hundred times as a 
priest i have rendered great services both to the state and to my friends the 
value of a word once passed is estimated according to the worth of the man who 
gives it so long as it is in his own keeping it is of the purest finest gold 
when his wish to keep it has passed away it is a two-edged sword with that word 
therefore he defends himself as with an honorable weapon considering that when 
he disregards his word that man of honor he endangers his life he courts the 
risk rather than that his adversary should secure advantages and then monsieur 
he appeals to heaven and to justice fouquet bent down his head as he replied i 
am a poor breton opinionated and commonplace my mind admires and fears yours i 
do not say that i keep my word from a moral instinct i keep it if you like by 
force of habit but at all events the ordinary run of men are simple enough to 
admire this custom of mine it is my single virtue leave me the honor of it and 
so you are determined to sign the sale of the office which would defend you 
against all your enemies yes i shall sign you will deliver yourself up then 
bound hand and foot from a false notion of honor which the most scrupulous 
casuists would disdain i shall sign repeated fouquet aramis sighed deeply and 
looked all round him with the impatient gesture of a man who would gladly dash 
something to pieces as a relief to his feelings we have still one means left he 
said and i trust you will not refuse to make use of that certainly not if it be 
loyal and honorable as everything is in fact which you propose i know nothing 
more loyal than a renunciation of your purchaser is he a friend of yours 
certainly but but if you allow me to manage the affair i do not despair oh you 
shall be absolute master with whom are you in treaty what man is it i am not 
aware whether you know the parliament most of its members one of the presidents 
perhaps no only a counsellor ah ah who is named vanel aramis became purple 
vanel he cried rising abruptly from his seat vanel the husband of marguerite 
vanel exactly of your former mistress yes my dear fellow she is anxious to be 
madame the procureuse-general i certainly owed poor vanel that slight 
concession and i am a gainer by it since i at the same time confer a pleasure 
on his wife aramis walked straight to fouquet and took hold of his hand do you 
know he said very calmly the name of madame vanels new lover ah she has a new 
lover then i was not aware of it no i have no idea what his name is his name is 
m jean baptiste colbert he is intendant of the finances he lives in the rue 
croix-des-petits-champs where madame de chevreuse has this evening carried 
mazarins letters which she wishes to sell gracious heaven murmured fouquet 
passing his hand across his forehead from which the perspiration was starting 
you now begin to understand do you not that i am lost yes do you now think it 
worth while to be so scrupulous with regard to keeping your word yes said 
fouquet these obstinate people always contrive matters in such a way that one 
cannot but admire them murmured aramis fouquet held out his hand to him and at 
the very moment a richly ornamented tortoise-shell clock supported by golden 
figures which was standing on a console table opposite to the fireplace struck 
six the sound of a door opening in the vestibule was heard m vanel said 
gourville at the door of the cabinet inquiries if monseigneur can receive him 
fouquet turned his eyes from those of aramis and replied let m vanel come in 
chapter x m colberts rough draught vanel who entered at this stage of the 
conversation was for aramis and fouquet the full stop which terminates a 
sentence but for vanel aramiss presence in fouquets cabinet had quite another 
signification at his first step into the room he fixed upon the delicate yet 
firm countenance of the bishop of vannes a look of astonishment which soon 
became one of scrutinizing inquiry as for fouquet a true politician that is to 
say complete master of himself he had already by the energy of his own resolute 
will contrived to remove from his face all traces of the emotion which aramiss 
revelation had occasioned he was no longer therefore a man overwhelmed by 
misfortune and reduced to expedients he held his head proudly erect and 
extended his hand with a gesture of welcome to vanel he was prime minister he 
was in his own house aramis knew the superintendent well the delicacy of the 
feelings of his heart and the exalted nature of his mind could no longer 
surprise him he confined himself then for the moment intending to resume later 
an active part in the conversation to the difficult role of a man who looks on 
and listens in order to learn and understand vanel was visibly overcome and 
advanced into the middle of the cabinet bowing to everything and everybody i am 
come he said you are exact m vanel returned fouquet in matters of business 
monseigneur replied vanel i look upon exactitude as a virtue no doubt monsieur 
i beg your pardon interrupted aramis indicating vanel with his finger but 
addressing himself to fouquet this is the gentleman i believe who has come 
about the purchase of your appointment yes i am replied vanel astonished at the 
extremely haughty tone with which aramis had put the question but in what way 
am i to address you who do me the honor call me monseigneur replied aramis 
dryly vanel bowed come gentlemen said fouquet a truce to these ceremonies let 
us proceed to business monseigneur sees said vanel that i am waiting his 
pleasure on the contrary it is i who wait replied fouquet what for monseigneur 
i thought that perhaps you would have something to say oh said vanel to himself 
he has reflected on the matter and i am lost but resuming his courage he 
continued no monseigneur nothing absolutely nothing more than what i said to 
you yesterday and which i am ready to repeat now come now tell me frankly m 
vanel is not the affair rather a burdensome one for you certainly monseigneur 
fourteen hundred thousand livres is an important sum so important indeed said 
fouquet that i have reflected you have been reflecting do you say monseigneur 
exclaimed vanel anxiously yes that you might not yet be in a position to 
purchase oh monseigneur do not make yourself uneasy on that score m vanel i 
shall not blame you for a failure in your word which evidently will be due to 
inability on your part oh yes monseigneur you would blame me and you would be 
right in doing so said vanel for a man must be either imprudent or a fool to 
undertake engagements which he cannot keep and i at least have always regarded 
a thing agreed upon as a thing done fouquet colored while aramis uttered a hum 
of impatience you would be wrong to emphasize such notions as those monsieur 
said the superintendent for a mans mind is variable and full of little caprices 
very excusable and sometimes very worthy of respect and a man may have wished 
for something yesterday and to-day have changed his mind vanel felt a cold 
sweat trickle down his face monseigneur he muttered aramis who was delighted to 
find the superintendent carrying on the debate with such clearness and 
precision stood leaning his arm upon the marble top of a console table and 
began to play with a small gold knife with a malachite handle fouquet did not 
hasten to reply but after a moments pause come my dear m vanel he said i will 
explain to you how i am situated vanel began to tremble yesterday i wished to 
sell monseigneur has done more than wish to sell monseigneur has sold well well 
that may be so but to-day i ask you as a favor to restore me my word which i 
pledged you i received your word as a perfect assurance that it would be kept i 
know that and that is the reason why i now entreat you do you understand me i 
entreat you to restore it to me fouquet suddenly paused the words i entreat you 
the force of which he did not immediately perceive seemed almost to choke him 
as he uttered it aramis still playing with his knife fixed a look upon vanel 
which seemed to search the inmost recess of his heart vanel simply bowed as he 
said i am overcome monseigneur at the honor you do me to consult me upon a 
matter of business which is already completed but nay do not say but dear m 
vanel alas monseigneur you see he said as he opened a large pocket-book i have 
brought the money with me the whole sum i mean and here monseigneur is the 
contract of sale which i have just effected of a property belonging to my wife 
the order is authentic in every way the necessary signatures have been attached 
to it and it is made payable at sight it is ready money in one word the affair 
is complete my dear m vanel there is not a matter of business in this world 
however important it may be which cannot be postponed in order to oblige 
certainly said vanel awkwardly to oblige a man who by that means might and 
would be made a devoted friend certainly monseigneur and the more completely a 
friend m vanel in proportion to the importance of the service rendered since 
the value of the service he had received would have been so considerable well 
what do you decide vanel preserved silence in the mean time aramis had 
continued his observations vanels narrow face his deeply sunk orbits his arched 
eyebrows had revealed to the bishop of vannes the type of an avaricious and 
ambitious character aramiss method was to oppose one passion by another he saw 
fouquet defeated demoralized he threw himself into the contest with new weapons 
excuse me monseigneur he said you forget to show m vanel that his own interests 
are diametrically opposed to this renunciation of the sale vanel looked at the 
bishop with astonishment he had hardly expected to find an auxiliary in him 
fouquet also paused to listen to the bishop do you not see continued aramis 
that m vanel in order to purchase your appointment has been obliged to sell a 
property which belongs to his wife well that is no slight matter for one cannot 
displace fourteen or fifteen hundred thousand livres as he has done without 
considerable loss and very serious inconvenience perfectly true said vanel 
whose secret aramis had with his keen-sighted gaze wrung from the bottom of his 
heart such embarrassments pursued aramis resolve themselves into expenses and 
when one has a large disbursement to make expenses are to be considered yes yes 
said fouquet who began to understand aramiss meaning vanel remained silent he 
too had understood him aramis observed his coldness of manner and his silence 
very good he said to himself you are waiting i see until you know the amount 
but do not fear i shall send you such a flight of crowns that you cannot but 
capitulate on the spot we must offer m vanel a hundred thousand crowns at once 
said fouquet carried away by his generosity the sum was a good one a prince 
even would have been satisfied with such a bonus a hundred thousand crowns at 
that period was the dowry of a kings daughter vanel however did not move he is 
a rascal thought the bishop we must offer the five hundred thousand livres at 
once and he made a sign to fouquet you seem to have spent more than that dear m 
vanel said the superintendent the price of money is enormous you must have made 
a great sacrifice in selling your wifes property well what can i have been 
thinking of it is an order for five hundred thousand livres that i am about to 
sign for you and even in that case i shall feel that i am greatly indebted to 
you there was not a single gleam of delight or desire on vanels face which 
remained impassive not a muscle of it changed in the slightest degree aramis 
cast a look of despair at fouquet and then going straight up to vanel and 
taking hold of him by the coat with the gesture used by men of high rank he 
said m vanel it is neither the inconvenience nor the displacement of your money 
nor the sale of your wifes property even that you are thinking of at this 
moment it is something still more important i can well understand it so pay 
particular attention to what i am going to say yes monseigneur vanel replied 
beginning to tremble the fire in the eyes of the prelate scorched him i offer 
you therefore in the superintendents name not three hundred thousand livres nor 
five hundred thousand but a million a million do you understand me he added as 
he shook him nervously a million repeated vanel as pale as death a million in 
other words at the present rate of interest an income of seventy thousand 
livres come monsieur said fouquet you can hardly refuse that answer do you 
accept impossible murmured vanel aramis bit his lips and something like a white 
cloud passed over his face that cloud indicated thunder he still kept his hold 
on vanel you have purchased the appointment for fifteen hundred thousand livres 
i think well we will give you these fifteen hundred thousand livres by paying m 
fouquet a visit and shaking hands with him you will have become a gainer of a 
million and a half you get honor and profit at the same time m vanel i cannot 
do it said vanel hoarsely very well replied aramis who had grasped vanel so 
tightly by the coat that when he let go his hold vanel staggered back a few 
paces very well one can now see clearly enough your object in coming here yes 
said fouquet one can easily see that but said vanel attempting to stand erect 
before the weakness of these two men of honor the fellow presumes to speak said 
aramis with the tone of an emperor fellow repeated vanel the wretch i meant to 
say added the prelate who had now resumed his usual self-possession come 
monsieur produce your deed of sale you should have it there in one of your 
pockets already prepared as an assassin holds his pistol or his dagger 
concealed under his cloak vanel began to mutter something enough cried fouquet 
where is this deed vanel tremblingly searched in his pockets and as he drew out 
his pocketbook a paper fell out of it while vanel offered the other to fouquet 
aramis pounced upon the paper which had fallen out the handwriting of which he 
recognized i beg your pardon said vanel that is a rough draught of the deed i 
see that very clearly retorted aramis with a smile more cutting than a lash of 
a whip would have been and what surprises me is that this draught is in m 
colberts handwriting look monseigneur look and he handed the paper to fouquet 
who recognized the truth of his remark for covered with erasures with inserted 
words the margins filled with additions this deed an open proof of colberts 
plot had just revealed everything to its unhappy victim well murmured fouquet 
vanel completely humiliated seemed as if he were looking for some deep hole 
where he could hide himself well said aramis if your name were not fouquet and 
if your enemys name were not colbert if you had to deal only with this mean 
thief before you i should say to you repudiate it such a proof as this absolves 
you from your word but these fellows would think you were afraid they would 
fear you less than they do therefore sign monseigneur and he held out a pen 
towards him fouquet pressed aramiss hand but instead of the deed which vanel 
handed to him he took the rough draught of it no not that paper said aramis 
hastily this is the one the other is too precious a document for you to part 
with no no replied fouquet i will sign upon the paper of m colbert and i write 
the writing is approved he then signed and said here it is m vanel and the 
latter seized the paper laid down his money and was about to retreat one moment 
said aramis are you quite sure the exact amount is there it ought to be counted 
over m vanel particularly since it is money which m colbert presents to the 
ladies ah that worthy m colbert is not so generous as m fouquet and aramis 
spelling every word every letter of the order to pay distilled his wrath and 
his contempt drop by drop upon the miserable wretch who had to submit to this 
torture for a quarter of an hour he was then dismissed not in words but by a 
gesture as one dismisses a beggar or discharges a menial as soon as vanel had 
gone the minister and the prelate their eyes fixed on each other remained 
silent for a few moments well said aramis the first to break the silence to 
what can that man be compared who entering into a conflict with an enemy armed 
from head to foot thirsting for his life strips himself throws down his arms 
and sends kisses to his adversary good faith m fouquet is a weapon which 
scoundrels very frequently make use of against men of honor and it answers 
their purpose men of honor ought in their turn also to make use of bad faith 
against such scoundrels you would soon see how strong they would become without 
ceasing to be men of honor it would be rascally conduct replied fouquet not at 
all it would be merely coquetting or playing with the truth and now since you 
have finished with this vanel since you have deprived yourself of the happiness 
of confounding him by repudiating your word and since you have given up to be 
used against yourself the only weapon which can ruin us my dear friend said 
fouquet mournfully you are like the teacher of philosophy whom la fontaine was 
telling us about the other day he saw a child drowning and began to read him a 
lecture divided into three heads aramis smiled as he said philosophy yes 
teacher yes a drowning child yes but a child that can be saved you shall see 
and first of all let us talk about business fouquet looked at him with an air 
of astonishment did you not some time ago speak to me about an idea you had of 
giving a fete at vaux oh said fouquet that was when affairs were flourishing a 
fete i believe to which the king without prompting invited himself no no my 
dear prelate a fete to which m colbert advised the king to invite himself ah 
exactly as it would be a fete of so costly a character that you would be ruined 
in giving it precisely so in other times as i said just now i had a kind of 
pride in showing my enemies the fruitfulness of my resources i felt it a point 
of honor to strike them with amazement in creating millions under circumstances 
where they had imagined nothing but bankruptcies possible but at the present 
day i am arranging my accounts with the state with the king with myself and i 
must now become a mean stingy man i shall be able to prove to the world that i 
can act or operate with my deniers as i used to do with my bags of pistoles and 
beginning to-morrow my equipages shall be sold my houses mortgaged my expenses 
contracted beginning with to-morrow interrupted aramis quietly you will occupy 
yourself without the slightest delay with your fete at vaux which must 
hereafter be spoken of with the most magnificent productions of your most 
prosperous days you are mad chevalier dherblay i you do not think that what do 
you mean then do you not know that a fete at vaux of the very simplest possible 
character would cost four or five millions i do not speak of a fete of the very 
simplest possible character my dear superintendent but since the fete is to be 
given to the king replied fouquet who misunderstood aramiss idea it cannot be 
simple just so it ought to be on a scale of the most unbounded magnificence in 
that case i shall have to spend ten or twelve millions you shall spend twenty 
if you require it said aramis calmly where shall i get them exclaimed fouquet 
that is my affair monsieur the superintendent and do not be uneasy for a moment 
about it the money will be placed at once at your disposal sooner than you will 
have arranged the plans of your fete chevalier chevalier said fouquet giddy 
with amazement whither are you hurrying me across the gulf into which you were 
about to fall replied the bishop of vannes take hold of my cloak and throw fear 
aside why did you not tell me that sooner aramis there was a day when with one 
million you could have saved me while to-day i can give you twenty said the 
prelate such is the case however the reason is very simple on the day you speak 
of i had not at my disposal the million which you needed while now i can easily 
procure the twenty millions we require may heaven hear you and save me aramis 
smiled with the singular expression habitual with him heaven never fails to 
hear me he said perhaps because i pray with a loud voice i abandon myself to 
you unreservedly fouquet murmured no no i do not understand it in that manner 
it is i who am entirely at your service therefore you who have the clearest the 
most delicate and the most ingenious mind you shall have entire control over 
the fete even to the very smallest details only only said fouquet as a man 
accustomed to appreciate the value of a parenthesis well then leaving the 
entire invention of the details to you i shall reserve to myself a general 
superintendence over the execution in what way i mean that you will make of me 
on that day a majordomo a sort of inspector-general or factotum something 
between a captain of the guard and manager or steward i will look after the 
people and will keep the keys of the doors you will give your orders of course 
but will give them to no one but to me they will pass through my lips to reach 
those for whom they are intended you understand no i do not understand but you 
agree of course of course my friend that is all i care about thanks and prepare 
your list of invitations whom shall i invite every one chapter xi in which the 
author thinks it is now time to return to the vicomte de bragelonne our readers 
have observed in this history the adventures of the new and of the past 
generation unrolled as it were side by side to the former the reflection of the 
glory of earlier years the experience of the bitter things of this world to the 
former also the peace which takes possession of the heart and the healing of 
the scars which were formerly deep and painful wounds to the latter the 
conflicts of love and vanity bitter disappointments and ineffable delights life 
instead of memory if any variety has been presented to the reader in the 
different episodes of this tale it is to be attributed to the numerous shades 
of color which are presented on this double palette where two pictures are seen 
side by side mingling and harmonizing their severe and pleasing tones the 
repose of the emotions of the one is found in the midst of the emotions of the 
other after having talked reason with older heads one likes to share in the 
wildness of young people therefore if the threads of this story do not seem 
very intimately to connect the chapter we are now writing with that we have 
just written we do not intend to give ourselves any more thought or trouble 
about it than ruysdael took in painting an autumn sky after having finished a 
spring-time scene we wish our readers to do as much and to resume raoul de 
bragelonnes story at the very place where our last sketch left him in a state 
of frenzy and dismay or rather without reason without will without purpose 
raoul fled heedlessly away after the scene in la vallieres room the king 
montalais louise that chamber that strange exclusion louises grief montalaiss 
terror the kings wrath all seemed to indicate some misfortune but what he had 
arrived from london because he had been told of the existence of a danger and 
at once this danger showed itself was not that sufficient for a lover certainly 
it was but it was insufficient for a pure and upright heart such as his and yet 
raoul did not seek for explanations in the quarter where all jealous or less 
timid lovers would have sought them he did not go straightway to his mistress 
and say louise is it true that you love me no longer is it true that you love 
another full of courage full of friendship as he was full of love a religious 
observer of his word and believing the words of others raoul said within 
himself guiche wrote to put me on my guard guiche knows something i will go and 
ask guiche what he knows and tell him what i have seen the journey was not a 
long one guiche who had been brought from fontainebleau to paris within the 
last two days was beginning to recover from his wound and to walk about a 
little in his room he uttered a cry of joy as he saw raoul enter his apartment 
with the eagerness of friendship raoul uttered a cry of grief on seeing de 
guiche so pale so thin so melancholy a few words and a simple gesture which de 
guiche made to put aside raouls arm were sufficient to inform the latter of the 
truth ah so it is said raoul seating himself beside his friend one loves and 
dies no no not dies replied guiche smiling since i am now recovering and since 
too i can press you in my arms ah i understand and i understand you too you 
fancy i am unhappy raoul alas no i am the happiest of men my body suffers but 
not my mind or my heart if you only knew oh i am indeed the very happiest of 
men so much the better replied raoul so much the better provided it lasts it is 
over i have had enough happiness to last me to my dying day raoul i have no 
doubt you have had but she listen i love her because but you are not listening 
to me i beg your pardon your mind is preoccupied well yes your health in the 
first place it is not that my dear friend you would be wrong i think to ask me 
any questions you and he laid so much weight upon the you that he completely 
enlightened his friend upon the nature of the evil and the difficulty of 
remedying it you say that raoul on account of what i wrote to you certainly we 
will talk over that matter a little when you shall have finished telling me of 
all your own pleasures and pains my dear friend i am entirely at your service 
now thank you i have hurried i have flown here i came here from london in half 
the time the government couriers usually take now tell me my dear friend what 
did you want nothing whatever but to make you come well then i am here all is 
quite right then there is still something else i imagine no indeed de guiche 
upon my honor you cannot possibly have crushed all my hopes so violently or 
have exposed me to being disgraced by the king for my return which is in 
disobedience of his orders you cannot in short have planted jealousy in my 
heart merely to say to me it is all right sleep quietly i do not say to you 
raoul sleep quietly but pray understand me i never will nor can i indeed tell 
you anything else oh my friend for whom do you take me what do you mean if you 
know anything why conceal it from me if you do not know anything why did you 
warn me true true i was very wrong and i regret having done so raoul it seems 
nothing to write to a friend and say come but to have this friend face to face 
to feel him tremble and breathlessly wait to hear what one hardly dare tell him 
dare i have courage enough if you have not exclaimed raoul in despair see how 
unjust you are and how soon you forget you have to do with a poor wounded 
fellow the half of your heart calm yourself raoul i said to you come you are 
here ask nothing further of the unhappy de guiche you summoned me in the hope 
that i should see with my own eyes did you not nay do not hesitate for i have 
seen all oh exclaimed de guiche or at least i thought there now you see you are 
not sure but if you have any doubt my poor friend what remains for me to do i 
have seen louise agitated montalais in a state of bewilderment the king the 
king yes you turn your head aside the danger is there the evil is there tell me 
is it not so it is the king i say nothing oh you say a thousand upon a thousand 
times more than nothing give me facts for pitys sake give me proofs my friend 
the only friend i have speak my heart is crushed wounded to death i am dying 
from despair if that really be so my dear raoul replied de guiche you relieve 
me from my difficulty and i will tell you all sure that i can tell you nothing 
but what is consoling compared to the despair in which i now see you go on go 
on i am listening well then i can only tell you what you can learn from the 
first-comer from the first-comer it is talked about cried raoul before you say 
people talk about it learn what it is that people can talk about i assure you 
solemnly that people only talk about what may in truth be very innocent perhaps 
a walk ah a walk with the king yes certainly a walk with the king and i believe 
the king has very frequently before taken walks with ladies without on that 
account you would not have written to me shall i say again if there had been 
nothing unusual in this promenade i know that while the storm lasted it would 
have been far better if the king had taken shelter somewhere else than to have 
remained with his head uncovered before la valliere but but the king is so 
courteous oh de guiche de guiche you are killing me do not let us talk any more 
then nay let us continue this walk was followed by others i suppose no i mean 
yes there was the adventure of the oak i think but i know nothing about the 
matter at all raoul rose de guiche endeavored to imitate him notwithstanding 
his weakness well i will not add another word i have said either too much or 
not enough let others give you further information if they will or if they can 
my duty was to warn you and that i have done watch over your own affairs now 
yourself question others alas you are no true friend to speak to me in that 
manner said the young man in utter distress the first man i shall question may 
be either evilly disposed or a fool if the former he will tell me a lie to 
torment me if the latter he will do still worse ah de guiche de guiche before 
two hours are over i shall have been told ten falsehoods and shall have as many 
duels on my hands save me then is it not best to know ones whole misfortune but 
i know nothing i tell you i was wounded in a fever my senses were gone and i 
have only effaced impressions of it all but there is no reason why we should 
search very far when the very man we want is close at hand is not dartagnan 
your friend oh true true go to him then he will throw light on the subject and 
without seeking to injure your eyes at this moment a lackey entered the room 
what is it said de guiche some one is waiting for monseigneur in the cabinet 
des porcelaines very well will you excuse me my dear raoul i am so proud since 
i have been able to walk again i would offer you my arm de guiche if i did not 
guess that the person in question is a lady i believe so said de guiche smiling 
as he quitted raoul raoul remained motionless absorbed overwhelmed like the 
miner upon whom a vault has just fallen in he is wounded his life-blood is 
welling fast his thoughts are confused he endeavors to recover himself and to 
save his life and his reason a few minutes were all raoul needed to dissipate 
the bewildering sensations which had been occasioned by these two revelations 
he had already recovered the thread of his ideas when suddenly through the door 
he fancied he recognized montalaiss voice in the cabinet des porcelaines she he 
cried yes it is indeed her voice oh here is a woman who can tell me the truth 
but shall i question her here she conceals herself even from me she is coming 
no doubt from madame i will see her in her own apartment she will explain her 
alarm her flight the strange manner in which i was driven out she will tell me 
all that after m dartagnan who knows everything shall have given me fresh 
strength and courage madame a coquette i fear and yet a coquette who is herself 
in love has her moments of kindness a coquette who is as capricious and 
uncertain as life or death but who causes de guiche to say that he is the 
happiest of men he at least is lying on roses and so he hastily quitted the 
counts apartments and reproaching himself as he went for having talked of 
nothing but his own affairs to de guiche he arrived at dartagnans quarters 
chapter xii bragelonne continues his inquiries the captain was sitting buried 
in his leathern arm-chair his spur fixed in the floor his sword between his 
legs and was occupied in reading a great number of letters as he twisted his 
mustache dartagnan uttered a welcome full of pleasure when he perceived his 
friends son raoul my boy he said by what lucky accident does it happen that the 
king has recalled you these words did not sound over-agreeably in the young 
mans ears who as he seated himself replied upon my word i cannot tell you all 
that i know is that i have come back hum said dartagnan folding up his letters 
and directing a look full of meaning at him what do you say my boy that the 
king has not recalled you and that you have returned i do not at all understand 
that raoul was already pale enough and he began to turn his hat round and round 
in his hand with an air of constraint what the deuce is the matter that you 
look as you do and what makes you so dumb said the captain do people catch that 
fashion in england i have been in england and came back again as lively as a 
chaffinch will you not say something i have too much to say ah ah how is your 
father forgive me my dear friend i was going to ask you that dartagnan 
increased the sharpness of his penetrating gaze which no secret was capable of 
resisting you are unhappy about something he said i am indeed and you know very 
well what m dartagnan i of course nay do not pretend to be astonished i am not 
pretending to be astonished my friend dear captain i know very well that in all 
trials of finesse as well as in all trials of strength i shall be beaten by you 
you can see that at the present moment i am an idiot a fool i have neither head 
nor arm do not despise but help me in a few words i am the most wretched of 
living beings oh oh why that inquired dartagnan unbuckling his belt and 
softening the ruggedness of his smile because mademoiselle de la valliere is 
deceiving me she is deceiving you said dartagnan not a muscle of whose face had 
moved those are big words who makes use of them every one ah if every one says 
so there must be some truth in it i begin to believe there is fire when i see 
the smoke it is ridiculous perhaps but so it is therefore you do believe 
exclaimed bragelonne quickly i never mix myself up in affairs of that kind you 
know that very well what not for a friend for a son exactly if you were a 
stranger i should tell you i should tell you nothing at all how is porthos do 
you know monsieur cried raoul pressing dartagnans hand i entreat you in the 
name of the friendship you have vowed to my father the deuce take it you are 
really ill from curiosity no it is not from curiosity it is from love good 
another grand word if you were really in love my dear raoul you would be very 
different what do you mean i mean that if you were so deeply in love that i 
could believe i was addressing myself to your heart but it is impossible i tell 
you i love louise to distraction dartagnan could read to the very bottom of the 
young mans heart impossible i tell you he said you are like all young men you 
are not in love you are out of your senses well suppose it were only that no 
sensible man ever succeeded in making much of a brain when the head was turned 
i have lost my bearings in the same way a hundred times in my life you would 
listen to me but you would not hear me you would hear but you would not 
understand me you would understand but you would not obey me oh try try i say 
more even if i were unfortunate enough to know something and foolish enough to 
communicate it to you you are my friend you say indeed yes very good i should 
quarrel with you you would never forgive me for having destroyed your illusion 
as people say of love-affairs m dartagnan you know all and yet you plunge me in 
perplexity in despair in death there there i never complain as you know but as 
heaven and my father would never forgive me for blowing out my brains i will go 
and get the first person i meet to give me the information which you withhold i 
will tell him he lies and and you will kill him a fine affair that would be so 
much the better what should i care for it kill my boy kill if it can give you 
any pleasure it is exactly like a man with the toothache who keeps on saying oh 
what torture i am suffering i could bite iron my answer always is bite my 
friend bite the tooth will remain all the same i shall not kill any one 
monsieur said raoul gloomily yes yes you fellows of to-day put on those airs 
instead of killing you will get killed yourself i suppose you mean very fine 
indeed how much i should regret you i should say all day long ah what a 
high-flown simpleton that bragelonne was doubly an ingrate i have passed my 
whole life almost in teaching him how to hold his sword properly and the silly 
fellow has got himself spitted like a lark go then raoul go and get yourself 
disposed of if you like i dont know who taught you logic but god damn me as the 
english say whoever it was monsieur has stolen your fathers money raoul buried 
his face in his hands murmuring no no i have not a single friend in the world 
oh bah said dartagnan i meet with nothing but raillery or indifference idle 
fancies monsieur i do not laugh at you although i am a gascon and as for being 
indifferent if i were so i should have sent you to all the devils a quarter of 
an hour ago for you would sadden a man who was wild with joy and would kill one 
who was sad how now young man do you wish me to disgust you with the girl to 
whom you are attached and to teach you to execrate women who are the honor and 
happiness of human life oh tell me monsieur and i will bless you do you think 
my dear fellow that i can have crammed into my brain all that business about 
the carpenter and the painter and the staircase and the portrait and a hundred 
other tales to sleep over a carpenter what do you mean upon my word i dont know 
some one told me there was a carpenter who made an opening through a floor in 
la vallieres room oh i dont know where in the kings apartment perhaps of course 
if it were in the kings apartment i should tell you i suppose in whose room 
then i have told you for the last hour that i know nothing of the whole affair 
but the painter then the portrait it seems that the king wished to have the 
portrait of one of the ladies belonging to the court la vallieres why you seem 
to have only that name in your mouth who spoke to you of la valliere if it be 
not her portrait then why do you suppose it would concern me i do not suppose 
it will concern you but you ask me all sorts of questions and i answer you you 
wish to know the current scandal and i tell you make the best you can of it 
raoul struck his forehead with his hand in utter despair it will kill me he 
said so you have said already yes youre right and he made a step or two as if 
he were going to leave where are you going to find some one who will tell me 
the truth who is that a woman mademoiselle de la valliere herself i suppose you 
mean said dartagnan with a smile ah a famous idea that you wish to be consoled 
by some one and you will be so at once she will tell you nothing ill of herself 
of course so be off you are mistaken monsieur replied raoul the woman i mean 
will tell me all the evil she possibly can montalais ill wager yes montalais ah 
her friend a woman who in that capacity will exaggerate all that is either bad 
or good in the matter do not talk to montalais my good raoul you have some 
reason for wishing me not to talk with montalais well i admit it and in point 
of fact why should i play with you as a cat does with a poor mouse you distress 
me you do indeed and if i wish you not to speak to montalais just now it is 
because you will be betraying your secret and people will take advantage of it 
wait if you can i cannot so much the worse why you see raoul if i had an idea 
but i have not got one promise that you will pity me my friend that is all i 
need and leave me to get out of the affair by myself oh yes indeed in order 
that you may get deeper into the mire a capital idea truly go and sit down at 
that table and take a pen in your hand what for to write to ask montalais to 
give you an interview ah said raoul snatching eagerly at the pen which the 
captain held out to him suddenly the door opened and one of the musketeers 
approaching dartagnan said captain mademoiselle de montalais is here and wishes 
to speak to you to me murmured dartagnan ask her to come in i shall soon see he 
said to himself whether she wishes to speak to me or not the cunning captain 
was quite right in his suspicions for as soon as montalais entered she saw 
raoul and exclaimed monsieur monsieur i beg your pardon m dartagnan oh i 
forgive you mademoiselle said dartagnan i know that at my age those who look 
for me have great need of me i was looking for m de bragelonne replied 
montalais how fortunate and i was looking for you raoul wont you accompany 
mademoiselle montalais oh certainly go along then he said as he gently pushed 
raoul out of the cabinet and then taking hold of montalaiss hand he said in a 
low voice be kind towards him spare him and spare her too ah she said in the 
same tone of voice it is not i who will speak to him who then it is madame who 
has sent for him very good cried dartagnan it is madame is it in an hours time 
then the poor fellow will be cured or else dead said montalais in a voice full 
of compassion adieu m dartagnan she said and she ran to join raoul who was 
waiting for her at a little distance from the door very much puzzled and uneasy 
at the dialogue which promised no good to him chapter xiii two jealousies 
lovers are very tender towards everything which concerns the person with whom 
they are in love raoul no sooner found himself alone with montalais than he 
kissed her hand with rapture there there said the young girl sadly you are 
throwing your kisses away i will guarantee that they will not bring you back 
any interest how so why will you explain to me my dear aure madame will explain 
everything to you i am going to take you to her apartments what silence and 
throw aside your wild and savage looks the windows here have eyes the walls 
have ears have the kindness not to look at me any longer be good enough to 
speak to me aloud of the rain of the fine weather and of the charms of england 
at all events interrupted raoul i tell you i warn you that somewhere i know not 
where madame is sure to have eyes and ears open i am not very desirous you can 
easily believe to be dismissed or thrown into the bastille let us talk i tell 
you or rather do not let us talk at all raoul clinched his hands and assumed 
the look and gait of a man of courage but of a man of courage on his way to the 
torture montalais glancing in every direction walking along with an easy 
swinging gait and holding up her head pertly in the air preceded him to madames 
apartments where he was at once introduced well he thought this day will pass 
away without my learning anything de guiche had too much consideration for my 
feelings he has no doubt an understanding with madame and both of them by a 
friendly plot have agreed to postpone the solution of the problem why have i 
not here a good enemy that serpent de wardes for instance that he would bite is 
very likely but i should not hesitate any more to hesitate to doubt better by 
far to die raoul was in madames presence henrietta more charming than ever was 
half lying half reclining in her arm-chair her little feet upon an embroidered 
velvet cushion she was playing with a little kitten with long silky fur which 
was biting her fingers and hanging by the lace of her collar madame was 
thinking she was thinking profoundly it required both montalaiss and raouls 
voice to disturb her from her reverie your highness sent for me repeated raoul 
madame shook her head as if she were just awakening and then said good-morning 
m de bragelonne yes i sent for you so you have returned from england yes madame 
and i am at your royal highnesss commands thank you leave us montalais and the 
latter left the room you have a few minutes to give me m de bragelonne have you 
not all my life is at your royal highnesss disposal raoul returned with respect 
guessing that there was something serious under all these outward courtesies of 
madame nor was he displeased indeed to observe the seriousness of her manner 
feeling persuaded that there was some sort of affinity between madames 
sentiments and his own in fact every one at court of any perception at all well 
knew the capricious fancy and absurd despotism of the princesss singular 
character madame had been flattered beyond all bounds by the kings attentions 
she had made herself talked about she had inspired the queen with that mortal 
jealousy which is the gnawing worm at the root of every womans happiness madame 
in a word in her attempts to cure a wounded pride had found that her heart had 
become deeply and passionately attached we know what madame had done to recall 
raoul who had been sent out of the way by louis xiv raoul did not know of her 
letter to charles ii although dartagnan had guessed its contents who will 
undertake to account for that seemingly inexplicable mixture of love and vanity 
that passionate tenderness of feeling that prodigious duplicity of conduct no 
one can indeed not even the bad angel who kindles the love of coquetry in the 
heart of woman m de bragelonne said the princess after a moments pause have you 
returned satisfied bragelonne looked at madame henrietta and seeing how pale 
she was from what she was keeping back from what she was burning to disclose 
replied satisfied what is there for me to be satisfied or dissatisfied about 
madame but what are those things with which a man of your age and of your 
appearance is usually either satisfied or dissatisfied how eager she is thought 
raoul terrified what is it that she is going to breathe into my heart and then 
frightened at what she might possibly be going to tell him and wishing to put 
off the moment so wished for but so dreadful when he should learn all he 
replied i left behind me madame a dear friend in good health and on my return i 
find him very ill you refer to m de guiche replied madame henrietta with the 
most imperturbable self-possession i have heard he is a very dear friend of 
yours he is indeed madame well it is quite true he has been wounded but he is 
better now oh m de guiche is not to be pitied she said hurriedly and then 
recovering herself added but has he anything to complain of has he complained 
of anything is there any cause of grief or sorrow with which we are not 
acquainted i allude only to his wound madame so much the better then for in 
other respects m de guiche seems to be very happy he is always in very high 
spirits i am sure that you m de bragelonne would far prefer to be like him 
wounded only in the body for what indeed is such a wound after all raoul 
started alas he said to himself she is returning to it he made no reply what 
did you say she inquired i did not say anything madame you did not say anything 
you disapprove of my observation then you are perfectly satisfied i suppose 
raoul approached closer to her madame he said your royal highness wishes to say 
something to me and your instinctive kindness and generosity of disposition 
induce you to be careful and considerate as to your manner of conveying it will 
your royal highness throw this kind forbearance aside i am strong and i am 
listening ah replied henrietta what do you understand then that which your 
royal highness wishes me to understand said raoul trembling notwithstanding his 
command over himself as he pronounced these words in point of fact murmured the 
princess it seems cruel but since i have begun yes madame since your highness 
has deigned to begin will you deign to finish henrietta rose hurriedly and 
walked a few paces up and down her room what did m de guiche tell you she said 
suddenly nothing madame nothing did he say nothing ah how well i recognize him 
in that no doubt he wished to spare me and that is what friends call friendship 
but surely m dartagnan whom you have just left must have told you no more than 
de guiche madame henrietta made a gesture full of impatience as she said at 
least you know all that the court has known i know nothing at all madame not 
the scene in the storm not the scene in the storm not the tete-a-tete in the 
forest not the tete-a-tete in the forest nor the flight to chaillot raoul whose 
head drooped like the flower which has been cut down by the sickle made an 
almost superhuman effort to smile as he replied with the greatest gentleness i 
have had the honor to tell your royal highness that i am absolutely ignorant of 
everything that i am a poor unremembered outcast who has this moment arrived 
from england there have been so many stormy waves between myself and those whom 
i left behind me here that the rumor of none of the circumstances your highness 
refers to has been able to reach me henrietta was affected by his extreme 
pallor his gentleness and his great courage the principal feeling in her heart 
at that moment was an eager desire to hear the nature of the remembrance which 
the poor lover retained of her who had made him suffer so much m de bragelonne 
said she that which your friends have refused to do i will do for you whom i 
like and esteem i will be your friend you hold your head high as a man of honor 
should do and i should regret that you should have to bow it down under 
ridicule and in a few days it may be under contempt ah exclaimed raoul 
perfectly livid has it already gone so far if you do not know said the princess 
i see that you guess you were affianced i believe to mademoiselle de la 
valliere yes madame by that right then you deserve to be warned about her as 
some day or other i shall be obliged to dismiss her from my service dismiss la 
valliere cried bragelonne of course do you suppose that i shall always be 
accessible to the tears and protestations of the king no no my house shall no 
longer be made a convenience for such practices but you tremble no madame no 
said bragelonne making an effort over himself i thought i should have died just 
now that was all your royal highness did me the honor to say that the king wept 
and implored you yes but in vain returned the princess who then related to 
raoul the scene that took place at chaillot and the kings despair on his return 
she told him of his indulgence to herself and the terrible word with which the 
outraged princess the humiliated coquette had dashed aside the royal anger 
raoul bowed his head what do you think of it all she said the king loves her he 
replied but you seem to think she does not love him alas madame i still think 
of the time when she loved me henrietta was for a moment struck with admiration 
at this sublime disbelief and then shrugging her shoulders she said you do not 
believe me i see oh how deeply you love her and you doubt if she loves the king 
until i have proof pardon i have her word you see and she is a noble child you 
require a proof be it so come with me chapter xiv a domiciliary visit the 
princess preceding raoul led him through the courtyard towards that part of the 
building which la valliere inhabited and ascending the same staircase which 
raoul had himself ascended that very morning she paused at the door of the room 
in which the young man had been so strangely received by montalais the 
opportunity had been well chosen to carry out the project which madame 
henrietta had conceived for the chateau was empty the king the courtiers and 
the ladies of the court had set off for st germain madame henrietta alone aware 
of bragelonnes return and thinking over the advantages which might be drawn 
from this return had feigned indisposition in order to remain behind madame was 
therefore confident of finding la vallieres room and saint-aignans apartment 
unoccupied she took a pass-key from her pocket and opened the door of her 
maid-of-honors room bragelonnes gaze was immediately fixed upon the interior of 
the room which he recognized at once and the impression which the sight of it 
produced upon him was one of the first tortures that had awaited him the 
princess looked at him and her practised eye could at once detect what was 
passing in the young mans heart you asked me for proofs she said do not be 
astonished then if i give you them but if you do not think you have courage 
enough to confront them there is still time to withdraw i thank you madame said 
bragelonne but i came here to be convinced you promised to convince me do so 
enter then said madame and shut the door behind you bragelonne obeyed and then 
turned towards the princess whom he interrogated by a look you know where you 
are i suppose inquired madame henrietta everything leads me to believe that i 
am in mademoiselle de la vallieres room you are but i would observe to your 
highness that this room is a room and is not a proof wait said the princess as 
she walked to the foot of the bed folded up the screen into its several 
compartments and stooped down towards the floor look here she continued stoop 
down and lift up this trap-door a trap-door said raoul astonished for 
dartagnans words recurred to his mind and he remembered that dartagnan had made 
vague use of that word he looked in vain for some cleft or crevice which might 
indicate an opening or a ring to assist in lifting up some portion of the 
planking ah that is true said madame henrietta smiling i forgot the secret 
spring the fourth plank of the flooring press on the spot where you will 
observe a knot in the wood those are the instructions press viscount press i 
say yourself raoul pale as death pressed his finger on the spot which had been 
indicated to him at the same moment the spring began to work and the trap rose 
of its own accord it is very ingenious certainly said the princess and one can 
see that the architect foresaw that it would be a small hand which would have 
to employ that device see how easily the trap-door opens without assistance a 
staircase cried raoul yes and a very pretty one too said madame henrietta see 
viscount the staircase has a balustrade intended to prevent the falling of 
timid persons who might be tempted to descend and i will risk myself on it 
accordingly come viscount follow me but before following you madame may i ask 
whither this staircase leads ah true i forgot to tell you you know perhaps that 
formerly m de saint-aignan lived in the very next apartment to the kings yes 
madame i am aware of that that was the arrangement at least before i left and 
more than once i have had the honor of visiting him in his old rooms well he 
obtained the kings leave to change that convenient and beautiful apartment for 
the two rooms to which this staircase will conduct us and which together form a 
lodging for him twice as small and at ten times greater distance from the king 
a close proximity to whom is by no means disdained in general by the gentlemen 
belonging to the court very good madame returned raoul but go on i beg for i do 
not yet understand well then it accidentally happened continued the princess 
that m de saint-aignans apartment is situated underneath the apartments of my 
maids of honor and particularly underneath the room of la valliere but what was 
the motive of this trap-door and this staircase that i cannot tell you would 
you like to go down to m de saint-aignans rooms perhaps we shall there find the 
solution of the enigma madame set the example by going down herself and raoul 
sighing deeply followed her at every step bragelonne took he advanced farther 
into that mysterious apartment which had been witness to la vallieres sighs and 
still retained the sweetest perfume of her presence bragelonne fancied that he 
perceived as he inhaled his every breath that the young girl must have passed 
through there then succeeded to these emanations of herself which he regarded 
as invisible though certain proofs the flowers she preferred to all others the 
books of her own selection had raoul preserved a single doubt on the subject it 
would have vanished at the secret harmony of tastes and disposition of the mind 
shown in the things of common use la valliere in bragelonnes eyes was present 
there in every article of furniture in the color of the hangings in everything 
that surrounded him dumb and completely overwhelmed there was nothing further 
for him to learn and he followed his pitiless conductress as blindly as the 
culprit follows the executioner madame as cruel as all women of delicate and 
nervous temperaments are did not spare him the slightest detail but it must be 
admitted that notwithstanding the kind of apathy into which he had fallen none 
of these details even had he been left alone would have escaped him the 
happiness of the woman who loves when that happiness is derived from a rival is 
a torture for a jealous man but for a jealous man such as raoul was for that 
heart which for the first time was steeped in gall and bitterness louises 
happiness was in reality an ignominious death a death of body and soul he 
divined all their hands clasped in each others their faces drawn close together 
and reflected side by side in loving proximity as they gazed upon the mirrors 
around them so sweet an occupation for lovers who as they thus see themselves 
twice over impress the picture more enduringly in their memories he divined the 
kiss unseen behind the heavy curtains falling free of their bands he translated 
into feverish pains the eloquence of the couches hid in their shadow that 
luxury that studied elegance full of intoxication that extreme care to spare 
the loved object every annoyance or to occasion her a delightful surprise that 
strength and power of love multiplied by the strength and power of royalty 
itself struck raoul a mortal blow o if there be anything which can assuage the 
tortures of jealousy it is the inferiority of the man who is preferred to 
yourself while on the very contrary if there be a hell within hell a torture 
without name in language it is the almightiness of a god placed at the disposal 
of a rival together with youth beauty and grace in moments such as these god 
himself seems to have taken part against the rejected lover one final pang was 
reserved for poor raoul madame henrietta lifted a silk curtain and behind the 
curtain he perceived la vallieres portrait not only the portrait of la valliere 
but of la valliere eloquent of youth beauty and happiness inhaling life and 
enjoyment at every pore because at eighteen years of age love itself is life 
louise murmured bragelonne louise is it true then oh you have never loved me 
for never have you looked at me in that manner and he felt as if his heart were 
crushed within his bosom madame henrietta looked at him almost envious of his 
extreme grief although she well knew there was nothing to envy in it and that 
she herself was as passionately loved by de guiche as louise by bragelonne 
raoul interpreted madame henriettas look oh forgive me forgive me madame in 
your presence i know i ought to have greater mastery over myself but may the 
lord god of heaven and of earth grant that you may never be struck the blow 
which crushes me at this moment for you are but a woman and would not be able 
to endure so terrible an affliction forgive me i am but a poor gentleman while 
you belong to the race of the happy of the all-powerful of the elect m de 
bragelonne replied henrietta a heart such as yours merits all the consideration 
and respect which a queens heart even can bestow i am your friend monsieur and 
as such indeed i would not allow your whole life to be poisoned by perfidy and 
covered with ridicule it was i indeed who with more courage than any of your 
pretended friends i except m de guiche was the cause of your return from london 
it is i also who have given you these melancholy proofs necessary however for 
your cure if you are a lover with courage in his heart and not a weeping amadis 
do not thank me pity me even and do not serve the king less faithfully than you 
have done raoul smiled bitterly ah true true i was forgetting that the king is 
my master your liberty nay your very life is at stake a steady penetrating look 
informed madame henrietta that she was mistaken and that her last argument was 
not likely to affect the young man take care m de bragelonne she said for if 
you do not weigh well all your actions you might throw into an extravagance of 
wrath a prince whose passions once aroused exceed the limits of reason and you 
would thereby involve your friends and family in distress you must bend you 
must submit and must cure yourself i thank you madame i appreciate the advice 
your royal highness is good enough to give me and i will endeavor to follow it 
but one final word i beg name it should i be indiscreet in asking you the 
secret of this staircase of this trapdoor a secret which you have discovered oh 
nothing is more simple for the purpose of exercising a surveillance over the 
young girls who are attached to my service i have duplicate keys of their doors 
it seemed very strange to me that m de saint-aignan should change his 
apartments it seemed very strange that the king should come to see m de 
saint-aignan every day and finally it seemed very strange that so many things 
should be done during your absence that the very habits and customs of the 
court seemed to be changed i do not wish to be trifled with by the king nor to 
serve as a cloak for his love-affairs for after la valliere who weeps he will 
take a fancy to montalais who laughs and then to tonnay-charente who sings to 
act such a part as that would be unworthy of me i have thrust aside the 
scruples which my friendship for you suggested i have discovered the secret i 
have wounded your feelings i know and i again entreat you to excuse me but i 
had a duty to fulfill i have discharged it you are now forewarned the tempest 
will soon burst protect yourself you naturally expect however that a result of 
some kind must follow replied bragelonne with firmness for you do not suppose i 
shall silently accept the shame which is thrust upon me or the treachery which 
has been practised against me you will take whatever steps in the matter you 
please m raoul only do not betray the source whence you derived the truth that 
is all i have to ask that is the only price i require for the service i have 
rendered you fear nothing madame said bragelonne with a bitter smile i bribed 
the locksmith in whom the lovers had confided you can just as well do so as 
myself can you not yes madame your royal highness however has no other advice 
or caution to give me except that of not betraying you none other i am 
therefore about to beg your royal highness to allow me to remain here for one 
moment without me oh no madame it matters very little for what i have to do can 
be done in your presence i only ask one moment to write a line to some one it 
is dangerous m de bragelonne take care no one can possibly know that your royal 
highness has done me the honor to conduct me here besides i shall sign the 
letter i am going to write do as you please then raoul drew out his tablet and 
wrote rapidly on one of the leaves the following words monsieur the count do 
not be surprised to find here this paper signed by me the friend whom i shall 
very shortly send to call on you will have the honor to explain the object of 
my visit to you vicomte raoul de bragelonne rolling up the paper and slipping 
it into the lock of the door which communicated with the room set apart for the 
two lovers raoul satisfied himself that the paper was so apparent that de 
saint-aignan could not but see it as he entered then he rejoined the princess 
who had already reached the top of the staircase they then separated raoul 
pretending to thank her highness henrietta pitying or seeming to pity with all 
her heart the unhappy man she had just condemned to so fearful torture oh she 
said as she saw him disappear pale as death his eye injected with blood if i 
had known this i should have concealed the truth from that poor young man 
chapter xv porthoss plan of action the multiplicity of the personages we have 
introduced into this long history compels that each shall appear only in his 
own turn and according to the exigencies of the recital the result is that our 
readers have had no opportunity of again meeting our friend porthos since his 
return from fontainebleau the honors which he had received from the king had 
not changed the tranquil affectionate character of that worthy man only he held 
up his head a little higher than usual and a majesty of demeanor as it were 
betrayed itself since the honor of dining at the kings table had been accorded 
him his majestys banqueting-room had produced a certain effect upon porthos le 
seigneur de bracieux et de pierrefonds delighted to remember that during that 
memorable dinner the numerous array of servants and the large number of 
officials who were in attendance upon the guests gave a certain tone and effect 
to the repast and seemed to furnish the room porthos proposed to confer upon 
mouston a position of some kind or other in order to establish a sort of 
hierarchy among his domestics and to create a military household which was not 
unusual among the great captains of the age since in the preceding century this 
luxury had been greatly encouraged by messieurs de treville de schomberg de la 
vieuville without alluding to messieurs de richelieu de conde and de 
bouillon-turenne and therefore why should not he porthos the friend of the king 
and of m fouquet a baron an engineer etc why should not he indeed enjoy all the 
delightful privileges attached to large possessions and great merit somewhat 
neglected by aramis who we know was greatly occupied with m fouquet neglected 
also on account of his being on duty by dartagnan tired of truchen and planchet 
porthos was surprised to find himself dreaming without precisely knowing why 
but if any one had said to him do you want anything porthos he would most 
certainly have replied yes after one of those dinners during which porthos 
attempted to recall to his mind all the details of the royal banquet half 
joyful thanks to the excellence of the wines half melancholy thanks to his 
ambitious ideas porthos was gradually falling off into a gentle doze when his 
servant entered to announce that m de bragelonne wished to speak to him porthos 
passed into an adjoining room where he found his young friend in the 
disposition of mind of which we are already aware raoul advanced towards 
porthos and shook him by the hand porthos surprised at his seriousness of 
aspect offered him a seat dear m du vallon said raoul i have a service to ask 
of you nothing could happen more fortunately my young friend replied porthos i 
have had eight thousand livres sent me this morning from pierrefonds and if you 
want any money no i thank you it is not money my dear friend so much the worse 
then i have always heard it said that that is the rarest service but the 
easiest to render the remark struck me i like to cite remarks that strike me 
your heart is as good as your mind is sound and true you are too kind im sure 
will you have your dinner immediately no i am not hungry eh what a dreadful 
country england is not too much so but well if such excellent fish and meat 
were not to be procured there it would hardly be endurable yes i have come i am 
listening only allow me to take something to drink one gets thirsty in paris 
and porthos ordered a bottle of champagne to be brought then having first 
filled raouls glass he filled his own took a large draught and resumed i needed 
that in order to listen to you with proper attention i am now quite at your 
service what have you to ask me dear raoul what do you want give me your 
opinion upon quarrels in general my dear friend my opinion well but explain 
your idea a little replied porthos rubbing his forehead i mean are you 
generally of accommodating disposition whenever any misunderstanding arises 
between your friends and strangers oh of excellent disposition as always very 
good but what do you do in such a case whenever any friend of mine has a 
quarrel i always act upon one principle what is that that all lost time is 
irreparable and that one never arranges an affair so well as when the dispute 
is still warm ah indeed that is your principle thoroughly so as soon as a 
quarrel takes place i bring the two parties together exactly you understand 
that by this means it is impossible for an affair not to be arranged i should 
have thought said raoul with astonishment that treated in this manner an affair 
would on the contrary oh not the least in the world just fancy now i have had 
in my life something like a hundred and eighty to a hundred and ninety regular 
duels without reckoning hasty encounters or chance meetings it is a very 
handsome number said raoul unable to resist a smile a mere nothing but i am so 
gentle dartagnan reckons his duels by hundreds it is very true he is a little 
too hard and sharp i have often told him so and so resumed raoul you generally 
arrange the affairs of honor your friends confide to you there is not a single 
instance in which i have not finished by arranging every one of them said 
porthos with a gentleness and confidence which surprised raoul but the way in 
which you settle them is at least honorable i suppose oh rely upon that and at 
this stage i will explain my other principle to you as soon as my friend has 
confided his quarrel to me this is what i do i go to his adversary at once 
armed with a politeness and self-possession which are absolutely requisite 
under such circumstances that is the way then said raoul bitterly that you 
arrange the affairs so safely i believe so i go to the adversary then and say 
to him it is impossible monsieur that you are ignorant of the extent to which 
you have insulted my friend raoul puckered his brows it sometimes happens very 
often indeed pursued porthos that my friend has not been insulted at all he has 
even been the first to give offence you can imagine therefore whether my 
language is not well chosen and porthos burst into a peal of laughter decidedly 
said raoul to himself while the formidable thunder of porthoss laughter was 
ringing in his ears i am very unfortunate de guiche treats me with coldness 
dartagnan with ridicule porthos is too tame no one is ready to arrange this 
affair in my way and i came to porthos because i wished to find a sword instead 
of cold reasoning ah what wretched luck porthos who had recovered himself 
continued by a simple expression i leave my adversary without an excuse that is 
as it may happen said raoul indifferently not at all it is quite certain i have 
not left him an excuse and then it is that i display all my courtesy in order 
to attain the happy issue of my project i advance therefore with an air of 
great politeness and taking my adversary by the hand oh said raoul impatiently 
monsieur i say to him now that you are convinced of having given the offence we 
are sure of reparation between my friend and yourself the future can offer only 
an exchange of gracious ceremonies consequently i am instructed to give you the 
length of my friends sword what said raoul wait a minute the length of my 
friends sword my horse is waiting below my friend is in such and such a spot 
and is impatiently awaiting your agreeable society i will take you with me we 
can call upon your second as we go along the affair is arranged and so said 
raoul pale with vexation you reconcile the two adversaries on the ground i beg 
your pardon interrupted porthos reconcile what for you said that the affair was 
arranged of course since my friend is waiting for him well what then if he is 
waiting well if he is waiting it is merely to stretch his legs a little the 
adversary on the contrary is stiff from riding they place themselves in proper 
order and my friend kills his opponent the affair is ended ah he kills him 
cried raoul i should think so said porthos it is likely i should ever have as a 
friend a man who allows himself to get killed i have a hundred and one friends 
at the head of the list stand your father aramis and dartagnan all of whom are 
living and well i believe oh my dear baron exclaimed raoul delightedly as he 
embraced porthos you approve of my method then said the giant i approve of it 
so thoroughly that i shall have recourse to it this very day without a moments 
delay at once in fact you are the very man i have been looking for good here i 
am then you want to fight absolutely so it is very natural with whom with m de 
saint-aignan i know him a most agreeable man who was exceedingly polite to me 
the day i had the honor of dining with the king i shall certainly return his 
politeness even if that were not my usual custom so he has given you offence a 
mortal offence the devil i can say mortal offence more than that even if you 
like that is very convenient i may look upon it as all arranged may i not said 
raoul smiling as a matter of course where will you be waiting for him ah i 
forgot it is a very delicate matter m de saint-aignan is a great friend of the 
king so i have heard it said so that if i kill him oh you will kill him 
certainly you must take every precaution to do so but there is no difficulty in 
these matters now if you had lived in our early days oh that was something like 
my dear friend you have not quite understood me i mean that m de saint-aignan 
being a friend of the king the affair will be more difficult to manage since 
the king might learn beforehand oh no that is not likely you know my method 
monsieur you have injured my friend and yes i know it and then monsieur i have 
horses below i carry him off before he can have spoken to any one will he allow 
himself think you to be carried off like that i should think so i should like 
to see it fail it would be the first time if it did it is true though that the 
young men of the present day bah i would carry him off bodily if it were 
necessary and porthos adding gesture to speech lifted raoul and his chair very 
good said raoul laughing all we have to do is to state the grounds of the 
quarrel to m de saint-aignan well but that is done it seems no my dear m du 
vallon the usage of the present day requires that the cause of the quarrel be 
explained by your new method yes well then tell me what it is the fact is deuce 
take it see how troublesome this is in former days we never had any occasion to 
talk people fought then for the sake of fighting and i for one know no better 
reason than that you are quite right my friend however tell me what the cause 
is it is too long a story to tell only as one must particularize to some extent 
yes yes the devil with the new method as it is necessary i said to be specific 
and as on the other hand the affair is full of difficulties and requires the 
most absolute secrecy oh oh you will have the kindness merely to tell m de 
saint-aignan that he has insulted me in the first place by changing his 
lodgings by changing his lodgings good said porthos who began to count on his 
fingers next then in getting a trap-door made in his new apartments i 
understand said porthos a trapdoor upon my word this is very serious you ought 
to be furious at that what the deuce does the fellow mean by getting trap-doors 
made without first consulting you trap-doors mordioux i havent any except in my 
dungeons at bracieux and you will add said raoul that my last motive for 
considering myself insulted is the portrait that m de saint-aignan well knows 
is it possible a portrait too a change of residence a trap-door and a portrait 
why my dear friend with but one of those causes of complaint there is enough 
and more than enough for all the gentlemen in france and spain to cut one 
anothers throats and that is saying but very little well my dear friend you are 
furnished with all you need i suppose i shall take a second horse with me 
select your own rendezvous and while you are waiting there you can practise 
some of the best passes so as to get your limbs as elastic as possible thank 
you i shall be waiting for you in the wood of vincennes close to minimes alls 
right then where am i to find this m de saint-aignan at the palais-royal 
porthos rang a huge hand-bell my court suit he said to the servant who answered 
the summons my horse and a led horse to accompany me then turning to raoul as 
soon as the servant had quitted the room he said does your father know anything 
about this no i am going to write to him and dartagnan no nor dartagnan either 
he is very cautious you know and might have diverted me from my purpose 
dartagnan is a sound adviser though said porthos astonished that in his own 
loyal faith in dartagnan any one could have thought of himself so long as there 
was a dartagnan in the world dear m du vallon replied raoul do not question me 
any more i implore you i have told you all that i had to say it is prompt 
action that i now expect as sharp and decided as you know how to arrange it 
that indeed is my reason for having chosen you you will be satisfied with me 
replied porthos do not forget either that except ourselves no one must know 
anything of this meeting people always find these things out said porthos when 
a dead body is discovered in a wood but i promise you everything my dear friend 
except concealing the dead body there it is and it must be seen as a matter of 
course it is a principle of mine not to bury bodies that has a smack of the 
assassin about it every risk must take its risk as they say in normandy to work 
then my dear friend rely upon me said the giant finishing the bottle while the 
servant spread out upon a sofa the gorgeously decorated dress trimmed with lace 
raoul left the room saying to himself with a secret delight perfidious king 
traitorous monarch i cannot reach thee i do not wish it for the person of a 
king is sacred but your accomplice your panderer the coward who represents you 
shall pay for your crime i will kill him in thy name and afterwards we will 
think of louise chapter xvi the change of residence the trap-door and the 
portrait porthos to his great delight intrusted with this mission which made 
him feel young again took half an hour less than his usual time to put on his 
court suit to show that he was a man acquainted with the usages of the highest 
society he had begun by sending his lackey to inquire if m de saint-aignan were 
at home and received in answer that m le comte de saint-aignan had had the 
honor of accompanying the king to st germain as well as the whole court but 
that monsieur the count had just at that moment returned immediately upon this 
reply porthos made haste and reached de saint-aignans apartments just as the 
latter was having his boots taken off the expedition had been delightful the 
king who was in love more than ever and of course happier than ever had behaved 
in the most charming manner to every one nothing could possibly equal his 
kindness m de saint-aignan it may be remembered was a poet and fancied that he 
had proved that he was so under too many memorable circumstances to allow the 
title to be disputed by any one an indefatigable rhymester he had during the 
whole of the journey overwhelmed with quatrains sextains and madrigals first 
the king and then la valliere the king was on his side in a similarly poetical 
mood and had made a distich while la valliere like all women who are in love 
had composed two sonnets as one may see then the day had not been a bad one for 
apollo and therefore as soon as he had returned to paris de saint-aignan who 
knew beforehand that his verses would be extensively circulated in court 
circles occupied himself with a little more attention than he had been able to 
bestow during the excursion with the composition as well as with the idea 
itself consequently with all the tenderness of a father about to start his 
children in life he candidly asked himself whether the public would find these 
fruits of his imagination sufficiently elegant and graceful and in order to 
make his mind easy on the subject m de saint-aignan recited to himself the 
madrigal he had composed and which he had repeated from memory to the king and 
which he had promised to write out for him on his return iris vos yeux malins 
ne disent pas toujours ce que votre pensee a votre coeur confie iris pourquoi 
faut-il que je passe ma vie a plus aimer vos yeux qui mont joue ces tours this 
madrigal graceful as it was failed to satisfy de saint-aignan when it had 
passed from oral delivery to the written form of poetry many had thought it 
charming its author first of all but on second view it was not so pleasing so 
de saint-aignan sitting at his table with one leg crossed over the other and 
rubbing his brow repeated iris vos yeux malins ne disent pas toujours oh as to 
that now he murmured that is irreproachable i might even add that it is 
somewhat in the manner of ronsard or malherbe which makes me proud unhappily it 
is not so with the second line there is good reason for the saying that the 
easiest line to make is the first and he continued ce que votre pensee a votre 
coeur confie ah there is the thought confiding in the heart why should not the 
heart confide with as good reason in the thought in faith for my part i see 
nothing to hinder where the devil have i been to bring together these two 
hemistiches now the third is good iris pourquoi faut-il que je passe ma vie 
although the rhyme is not strong vie and confie my faith the abbe boyer who is 
a great poet has like me made a rhyme of vie and confie in the tragedy of 
oropaste or the false tonaxare without reckoning that m corneille did not 
scruple to do so in his tragedy of sophonisbe good then for vie and confie yes 
but the line is impertinent i remember now that the king bit his nail at that 
moment in fact it gives him the appearance of saying to mademoiselle de la 
valliere how does it happen that i am captivated by you it would have been 
better i think to say que benis soient les dieux qui condamnent ma vie 
condamnent ah well yes there is a compliment the king condemned to la valliere 
no then he repeated mais benis soient les dieux qui destinent ma vie not bad 
although destinent ma vie is weak but good heavens everything cant be strong in 
a quatrain a plus aimer vos yeux in loving more whom what obscurity but 
obscurity is nothing since la valliere and the king have understood me every 
one will understand me yes but here is something melancholy the last hemistich 
qui mont joue ces tours the plural necessitated by the rhyme and then to call 
the modesty of la valliere a trick that is not happy i shall be a byword to all 
my quill-driving acquaintances they will say that my poems are verses in the 
grand-seigneur style and if the king hears it said that i am a bad poet he will 
take it into his head to believe it while confiding these words to his heart 
and engaging his heart in these thoughts the count was undressing himself he 
had just taken off his coat and was putting on his dressing-gown when he was 
informed that m le baron du vallon de bracieux de pierrefonds was waiting to be 
received eh he said what does that bunch of names mean i dont know him it is 
the same gentleman replied the lackey who had the honor of dining with you 
monseigneur at the kings table when his majesty was staying at fontainebleau 
with the king at fontainebleau cried de saint-aignan eh quick quick introduce 
that gentleman the lackey hastened to obey porthos entered m de saint-aignan 
had an excellent recollection of persons and at the first glance he recognized 
the gentleman from the country who enjoyed so singular a reputation and whom 
the king had received so favorably at fontainebleau in spite of the smiles of 
some of those who were present he therefore advanced towards porthos with all 
outward signs of good-will which porthos thought but natural considering that 
he himself whenever he called upon an adversary hoisted the standard of the 
most refined politeness de saint-aignan desired the servant to give porthos a 
chair and the latter who saw nothing unusual in this act of politeness sat down 
gravely and coughed the ordinary courtesies having been exchanged between the 
two gentlemen the count since to him the visit was paid said may i ask monsieur 
the baron to what happy circumstance i owe the favor of your visit the very 
thing i am about to have the honor of explaining to you monsieur the count but 
i beg your pardon what is the matter monsieur inquired de saint-aignan i regret 
to say that i have broken your chair not at all monsieur said de saint-aignan 
not at all it is the fact though monsieur the count i have broken it so much so 
indeed that if i remain in it i shall fall down which would be an exceedingly 
disagreeable position for me in the discharge of the very serious mission which 
has been intrusted to me with regard to yourself porthos rose and but just in 
time for the chair had given way several inches de saint-aignan looked about 
him for something more solid for his guest to sit upon modern articles of 
furniture said porthos while the count was looking about are constructed in a 
ridiculously light manner in my early days when i used to sit down with far 
more energy than now i do not remember ever to have broken a chair except in 
taverns with my arms de saint-aignan smiled at this remark but said porthos as 
he settled himself on a couch which creaked but did not give way beneath his 
weight that unfortunately has nothing whatever to do with my present visit why 
unfortunately are you the bearer of a message of ill omen monsieur the baron of 
ill omen for a gentleman certainly not monsieur the count replied porthos nobly 
i have simply come to say that you have seriously offended a friend of mine i 
monsieur exclaimed de saint-aignan i have offended a friend of yours do you say 
may i ask his name m raoul de bragelonne i have offended m raoul de bragelonne 
cried de saint-aignan i really assure you monsieur that it is quite impossible 
for m de bragelonne whom i know but very slightly nay whom i know hardly at all 
is in england and as i have not seen him for a long time past i cannot possibly 
have offended him m de bragelonne is in paris monsieur the count said porthos 
perfectly unmoved and i repeat it is quite certain you have offended him since 
he himself told me you had yes monsieur you have seriously offended him 
mortally offended him i repeat it is impossible monsieur the baron i swear 
quite impossible besides added porthos you cannot be ignorant of the 
circumstance since m de bragelonne informed me that he had already apprised you 
of it by a note i give you my word of honor monsieur that i have received no 
note whatever this is most extraordinary replied porthos i will convince you 
said de saint-aignan that i have received nothing in any way from him and he 
rang the bell basque he said to the servant who entered how many letters or 
notes were sent here during my absence three monsieur the count a note from m 
de fiesque one from madame de laferte and a letter from m de las fuentes is 
that all yes monsieur the count speak the truth before this gentleman the truth 
you understand i will take care you are not blamed there was a note also from 
from well from whom from mademoiselle de la val that is quite sufficient 
interrupted porthos i believe you monsieur the count de saint-aignan dismissed 
the valet and followed him to the door in order to close it after him and when 
he had done so looking straight before him he happened to see in the keyhole of 
the adjoining apartment the paper which bragelonne had slipped in there as he 
left what is this he said porthos who was sitting with his back to the room 
turned round oh oh he said a note in the keyhole exclaimed de saint-aignan that 
is not unlikely to be the one we want monsieur the count said porthos de 
saint-aignan took out the paper a note from m de bragelonne he exclaimed you 
see monsieur i was right oh when i say a thing brought here by m de bragelonne 
himself the count murmured turning pale this is infamous how could he possibly 
have come here and the count rang again who has been here during my absence 
with the king no one monsieur that is impossible some one must have been here 
no one could possibly have entered monsieur since i kept the keys in my own 
pocket and yet i find this letter in that lock yonder some one must have put it 
there it could not have come alone basque opened his arms as if signifying the 
most absolute ignorance on the subject probably it was m de bragelonne himself 
who placed it there said porthos in that case he must have entered here without 
doubt monsieur how could that have been since i have the key in my own pocket 
returned basque perseveringly de saint-aignan crumpled up the letter in his 
hand after having read it there is something mysterious about this he murmured 
absorbed in thought porthos left him to his reflections but after a while 
returned to the mission he had undertaken shall we return to our little affair 
he said addressing de saint-aignan as soon as the lackey had disappeared i 
think i can now understand it from this note which has arrived here in so 
singular a manner m de bragelonne says that a friend will call i am his friend 
and am the one he alludes to for the purpose of giving me a challenge precisely 
and he complains that i have offended him mortally so in what way may i ask for 
his conduct is so mysterious that it at least needs some explanation monsieur 
replied porthos my friend cannot but be right and so far as his conduct is 
concerned if it be mysterious as you say you have only yourself to blame for it 
porthos pronounced these words with an amount of confidence which for a man who 
was unaccustomed to his ways must have indicated an infinity of sense mystery 
be it so but what is the mystery about said de saint-aignan you will think it 
best perhaps porthos replied with a low bow that i do not enter into 
particulars and for excellent reasons oh i perfectly understand you we will 
touch very lightly upon it then so speak monsieur i am listening in the first 
place monsieur said porthos you have changed your apartments yes that is quite 
true you admit it then said porthos with an air of satisfaction admit it of 
course i admit it why should i not admit it do you suppose you have admitted it 
very good said porthos lifting up one finger but how can my having moved my 
lodgings have done m de bragelonne any harm have the goodness to tell me that 
for i positively do not comprehend a word of what you are saying porthos 
stopped him and then said with great gravity monsieur this is the first of m de 
bragelonnes complaints against you if he makes a complaint it is because he 
feels himself insulted de saint-aignan began to beat his foot impatiently on 
the floor this looks like a bad quarrel he said no one can possibly have a bad 
quarrel with the vicomte de bragelonne returned porthos but at all events you 
have nothing to add on the subject of your changing your apartments i suppose 
nothing and what is the next point ah the next you will observe monsieur that 
the one i have already mentioned is a most serious injury to which you have 
given no answer or rather have answered very indifferently so monsieur you 
change your lodgings that offends m de bragelonne and you do not attempt to 
excuse yourself very well what cried de saint-aignan who was irritated by the 
coolness of his visitor what am i to consult m de bragelonne whether i am to 
move or not you can hardly be serious monsieur absolutely necessary monsieur 
but under any circumstances you will admit that it is nothing in comparison 
with the second ground of complaint well what is that porthos assumed a very 
serious expression as he said how about the trap-door monsieur de saint-aignan 
turned exceedingly pale he pushed back his chair so abruptly that porthos 
simple as he was perceived that the blow had told the trap-door murmured de 
saint-aignan yes monsieur explain that if you can said porthos shaking his head 
de saint-aignan held down his head oh i have been betrayed he murmured 
everything is known everything replied porthos who knew nothing you see me 
overwhelmed pursued de saint-aignan overwhelmed to such a degree that i hardly 
know what i am about a guilty conscience monsieur your affair is a bad one 
monsieur and when the public shall learn all about it and will judge oh 
monsieur exclaimed the count hurriedly such a secret ought not to be known even 
by ones confessor that we will think about said porthos the secret will not go 
far in fact but monsieur returned de saint-aignan is m de bragelonne in 
penetrating the secret aware of the danger to which he exposes himself and 
others m de bragelonne incurs no danger monsieur nor does he fear any either as 
you if it please heaven will find out very soon this fellow is a perfect madman 
thought de saint-aignan what in heavens name does he want he then said aloud 
come monsieur let us hush up this affair you forget the portrait said porthos 
in a voice of thunder which made the counts blood freeze in his veins as the 
portrait in question was la vallieres portrait and as no mistake could any 
longer exist on the subject de saint-aignans eyes were completely opened ah he 
exclaimed ah monsieur i remember now that m de bragelonne was engaged to be 
married to her porthos assumed an imposing air all the majesty of ignorance in 
fact as he said it matters nothing whatever to me nor to yourself indeed 
whether or not my friend was as you say engaged to be married i am even 
astonished that you should have made use of so indiscreet a remark it may 
possibly do your cause harm monsieur monsieur replied de saint-aignan you are 
the incarnation of intelligence delicacy and loyalty of feeling united i see 
the whole matter now clearly enough so much the better said porthos and pursued 
de saint-aignan you have made me comprehend it in the most ingenious and the 
most delicate manner possible thank you monsieur thank you porthos drew himself 
up only now that i know everything permit me to explain porthos shook his head 
as a man who does not wish to hear but de saint-aignan continued i am in 
despair i assure you at all that has happened but how would you have acted in 
my place come between ourselves tell me what would you have done porthos raised 
his head there is no question at all of what i should have done young man you 
have now he said been made acquainted with the three causes of complaint 
against you i believe as for the first my change of rooms and i now address 
myself to you as a man of honor and of great intelligence could i when the 
desire of so august a personage was so urgently expressed that i should move 
ought i to have disobeyed porthos was about to speak but de saint-aignan did 
not give him time to answer ah my frankness i see convinces you he said 
interpreting the movement in his own interest you perceive that i am right 
porthos did not reply de saint-aignan continued i pass to that unfortunate 
trap-door placing his hand on porthoss arm that trap-door the occasion and the 
means of so much unhappiness and which was constructed for you know what well 
then in plain truth do you suppose that it was i who of my own accord in such a 
place too had that trap-door made oh no you do not believe it and here again 
you feel you guess you understand the influence of a will superior to my own 
you can conceive the infatuation i do not speak of love that madness 
irresistible but thank heaven happily the affair is with a man who has so much 
sensitiveness of feeling if it were not so indeed what an amount of misery and 
scandal would fall upon her poor girl and upon him whom i will not name porthos 
confused and bewildered by the eloquence and gestures of de saint-aignan made a 
thousand efforts to stem this torrent of words of which by the by he did not 
understand a single one he remained upright and motionless on his seat and that 
was all he could do de saint-aignan continued and gave a new inflection to his 
voice and an increasing vehemence to his gesture as for the portrait for i 
readily believe the portrait is the principal cause of complaint tell me 
candidly if you think me to blame who was it that wished to have her portrait 
was it i who is in love with her is it i who desires her who has won her is it 
i no a thousand times no i know m de bragelonne must be in a state of despair i 
know these misfortunes are most cruel but i too am suffering as well and yet 
there is no possibility of offering any resistance if he struggles he will be 
derided if he resists he is lost you will tell me i know that despair is 
madness but you are reasonable you have understood me i perceive by your 
serious thoughtful embarrassed air even that the importance of the situation in 
which we are placed has not escaped you return therefore to m de bragelonne 
thank him as i have indeed reason to thank him for having chosen as an 
intermediary a man of your merit believe me that i shall on my side preserve an 
eternal gratitude for the man who has so ingeniously so cleverly corrected the 
misunderstanding between us and since ill-luck would have it that the secret 
should be known to four instead of to three why this secret which might make 
the most ambitious mans fortune i am delighted to share with you monsieur from 
the bottom of my heart i am delighted at it from this very moment you can make 
use of me as you please i place myself entirely at your mercy what can i 
possibly do for you what can i solicit nay require even speak monsieur speak 
according to the familiarly friendly fashion of that period de saint-aignan 
threw his arms round porthos and clasped him tenderly in his embrace porthos 
allowed him to do this with the most complete indifference speak resumed de 
saint-aignan what do you require monsieur said porthos i have a horse below be 
good enough to mount him he is a very good one and will play you no tricks 
mount on horseback what for inquired de saint-aignan with no little curiosity 
to accompany me where m de bragelonne is awaiting us ah he wishes to speak to 
me i suppose i can well believe that he wishes to have the details very likely 
alas it is a very delicate matter but at the present moment i cannot for the 
king is waiting for me the king will wait said porthos but where is m de 
bragelonne expecting me at the minimes at vincennes ah indeed but we are going 
to laugh over the affair when we get there i dont think it likely not i at 
least and the face of porthos assumed a stern hardness of expression the 
minimes is a rendezvous for duels very well what then have i to do at the 
minimes porthos slowly drew his sword and said that is the length of my friends 
sword why the man is mad cried de saint-aignan the color mounted to porthoss 
face as he replied if i had not the honor of being in your own apartment 
monsieur and of representing m de bragelonnes interests i would throw you out 
of the window it will be merely a pleasure postponed and you will lose nothing 
by waiting will you come to the minimes monsieur eh will you go thither of your 
own free will but i will carry you if you do not come take care basque cried m 
de saint-aignan as soon as basque appeared he said the king wishes to see 
monsieur the count that is very different said porthos the kings service before 
everything else we will wait there until this evening monsieur and saluting de 
saint-aignan with his usual courtesy porthos left the room delighted at having 
arranged another affair de saint-aignan looked after him as he left and then 
hastily putting on his coat again he ran off arranging his dress as he went 
along muttering to himself the minimes the minimes we will see how the king 
will like this challenge for it is for him after all pardieu chapter xvii rival 
politics on his return from the ride which had been so prolific in poetical 
effusions and in which everyone had paid tribute to the muses as the poets of 
the period used to say the king found m fouquet waiting for an audience behind 
the king came m colbert who had met the king in the corridor as if on the watch 
for him and followed him like a jealous and watchful shadow m colbert with his 
square head and his vulgar and untidy though rich costume which gave him some 
resemblance to a flemish gentleman after drinking beer fouquet at the sight of 
his enemy remained unmoved and during the whole of the scene which followed 
observed that line of conduct so difficult to a man of refinement whose heart 
is filled with contempt but who wishes to suppress every indication of it lest 
he may do his adversary too much honor colbert did not conceal his insolent joy 
in his opinion m fouquets was a game very badly played and hopelessly lost 
although not yet finished colbert belonged to that school of politicians who 
think cleverness alone worthy of their admiration and success the only thing 
worth caring for colbert moreover who was not simply an envious and jealous man 
but who had the kings interest really at heart because he was thoroughly imbued 
with the highest sense of probity in all matters of figures and accounts could 
well afford to assign as a pretext for his conduct that in hating and doing his 
utmost to ruin m fouquet he had nothing in view but the welfare of the state 
and the dignity of the crown none of these details escaped fouquets observation 
through his enemys thick bushy brows and despite the restless movement of his 
eyelids he could by merely looking at his eyes penetrate to the very bottom of 
colberts heart he saw then all there was in that heart hatred and triumph but 
as he wished while observing everything to remain himself impenetrable he 
composed his features smiled with that charmingly sympathetic smile which was 
peculiarly his own and saluted the king with the most dignified and graceful 
ease and elasticity of manner sire he said i perceive by your majestys joyous 
air that you have had a pleasant ride charming indeed monsieur the 
superintendent charming you were very wrong not to come with us as i invited 
you to do i was working sire replied the superintendent who did not take the 
trouble to turn aside his head even in recognition of colberts presence ah m 
fouquet cried the king there is nothing like the country i should be delighted 
to live in the country always in the open air and under the trees oh your 
majesty is not yet weary of the throne i trust said fouquet no but thrones of 
soft turf are very delightful your majesty gratifies my utmost wishes in 
speaking in that manner for i have a request to submit to you on whose behalf 
monsieur on behalf of the nymphs of vaux sire ah ah said louis xiv your majesty 
once deigned to make me a promise said fouquet yes i remember it the fete at 
vaux the celebrated fete is it not sire said colbert endeavoring to show his 
importance by taking part in the conversation fouquet with the profoundest 
contempt did not take the slightest notice of the remark as if so far as he was 
concerned colbert had not spoken your majesty is aware he said that i destine 
my estate at vaux to receive the most amiable of princes the most powerful of 
monarchs i have given you my promise monsieur said louis xiv smiling and a king 
never departs from his word and i have come now sire to inform your majesty 
that i am ready to obey your orders in every respect do you promise me many 
wonders monsieur the superintendent said louis looking at colbert wonders oh no 
sire i do not undertake that but i hope to be able to procure your majesty a 
little pleasure perhaps even a little forgetfulness of the cares of state nay 
nay m fouquet returned the king i insist upon the word wonders oh you are a 
magician we know your power we know that you could find gold even were there 
none in the world and in fact people say you make it fouquet felt that the shot 
was discharged from a double quiver and that the king had launched an arrow 
from his own bow as well as one from colberts oh said he laughingly the people 
know perfectly well out of what mine i procure the gold they know it only too 
well perhaps besides he added proudly i can assure your majesty that the gold 
destined to pay the expenses of the fete at vaux will cost neither blood nor 
tears hard labor it may perhaps but that can be paid for louis remained silent 
he wished to look at colbert colbert too wished to reply but a glance as swift 
as an eagles a proud loyal king-like glance indeed which fouquet darted at the 
latter arrested the words upon his lips the king who had by this time recovered 
his self-possession turned towards fouquet saying i presume therefore i am now 
to consider myself formally invited yes sire if it pleases your majesty for 
what day any day your majesty may find most convenient you speak like an 
enchanter who improvises m fouquet i could not say so much indeed your majesty 
will do whenever you please everything that a monarch can and ought to do the 
king of france has servants at his bidding who are able to do anything on his 
behalf to accomplish everything to gratify his pleasures colbert tried to look 
at the superintendent in order to see whether this remark was an approach to 
less hostile sentiments on his part but fouquet had not even looked at his 
enemy so far as he was concerned colbert did not exist very good then said the 
king will a week hence suit you perfectly well sire this is tuesday if i give 
you until next sunday week will that be sufficient the delay which your majesty 
deigns to accord me will greatly aid the various works which my architects have 
in hand for the purpose of adding to the amusement of your majesty and your 
friends by the by speaking of my friends resumed the king how do you intend to 
treat them the king is master everywhere sire your majesty will draw up your 
own list and give your own orders all those you may deign to invite will be my 
guests my honored guests indeed i thank you returned the king touched by the 
noble thought expressed in so noble a tone fouquet therefore took leave of 
louis xiv after a few words had been added with regard to the details of 
certain matters of business he felt that colbert would remain behind with the 
king that they would both converse about him and that neither of them would 
spare him in the least degree the satisfaction of being able to give a last and 
terrible blow to his enemy seemed to him almost like a compensation for 
everything to which they were about to subject him he turned back again 
immediately when he had already reached the door and addressing the king pardon 
sire said he pardon pardon for what said the king graciously for a serious 
fault which i committed unawares a fault you ah m fouquet i shall be unable to 
do otherwise than forgive you in what way or against whom have you been found 
wanting against all propriety sire i forgot to inform your majesty of a 
circumstance of considerable importance what is it colbert trembled he expected 
a denunciation his conduct had been unmasked a single syllable from fouquet a 
single proof formally advanced and before the youthful loyalty of louis xiv 
colberts favor would disappear at once the latter trembled therefore lest so 
daring a blow might not overthrow his whole scaffold in point of fact the 
opportunity was so admirably suited to be taken advantage of that a skilful 
player like aramis would not have let it slip sire said fouquet with an easy 
air since you have had the kindness to forgive me i am indifferent about my 
confession this morning i sold one of the official appointments i hold one of 
your appointments said the king which colbert turned livid that which conferred 
upon me sire a grand gown and an air of gravity the appointment of 
procureur-general the king involuntarily uttered a loud exclamation and looked 
at colbert who with his face bedewed with perspiration felt almost on the point 
of fainting to whom have you sold this appointment m fouquet inquired the king 
colbert was obliged to lean against the side of the fire-place to a councillor 
belonging to the parliament sire whose name is vanel vanel a friend of the 
intendant colbert added fouquet letting every word fall from his lips with 
inimitable nonchalance and with an admirably assumed expression of 
forgetfulness and ignorance which neither painter actor nor poet could 
reproduce with brush gesture or pen then having finished having overwhelmed 
colbert beneath the weight of this superiority the superintendent again saluted 
the king and quitted the room partially revenged by the stupefaction of the 
king and the humiliation of the favorite is it really possible said the king as 
soon as fouquet had disappeared that he has sold that office yes sire said 
colbert meaningly he must be mad the king added colbert this time did not reply 
he had penetrated the kings thought that thought promised him revenge his 
hatred was augmented by jealousy and a threat of disgrace was now added to the 
plan he had arranged for his ruin colbert felt assured that for the future as 
between louis xiv and himself his hostile ideas would meet with no obstacles 
and that at the first fault committed by fouquet which could be laid hold of as 
a pretext the chastisement impending over him would be precipitated fouquet had 
thrown aside his weapons of defence hate and jealousy had picked them up 
colbert was invited by the king to the fete at vaux he bowed like a man 
confident in himself and accepted the invitation with the air of one who 
confers a favor the king was about writing down de saint-aignans name on his 
list of invitations when the usher announced the comte de saint-aignan as soon 
as the royal mercury entered colbert discreetly withdrew chapter xviii rival 
lovers de saint-aignan had quitted louis xiv hardly two hours before but in the 
first effervescence of his affection whenever louis xiv did not see la valliere 
he was obliged to talk of her now the only person with whom he could speak 
about her at his ease was de saint-aignan and that person had therefore become 
indispensable to him ah is that you count the king exclaimed as soon as he 
perceived him doubly delighted not only to see him again but also to get rid of 
colbert whose scowling face always put him out of humor so much the better i am 
very glad to see you you will make one of the travelling-party i suppose of 
what travelling-party are you speaking sire inquired de saint-aignan the one we 
are making up to go to the fete the superintendent is about to give at vaux ah 
de saint-aignan you will at last see a fete a royal fete by the side of which 
all our amusements at fontainebleau are petty contemptible affairs at vaux the 
superintendent going to give a fete in your majestys honor nothing more than 
that nothing more than that do you say it is very diverting to find you 
treating it with so much disdain are you who express such indifference on the 
subject aware that as soon as it is known that m fouquet is going to receive me 
at vaux next sunday week people will be striving their very utmost to get 
invited to the fete i repeat de saint-aignan you shall be one of the invited 
guests very well sire unless i shall in the mean time have undertaken a longer 
and less agreeable journey what journey the one across the styx sire bah said 
louis xiv laughing no seriously sire replied de saint-aignan i am invited there 
and in such a way in truth that i hardly know what to say or how to act in 
order to refuse it i do not understand you i know that you are in a poetical 
vein but try not to sink from apollo to phoebus very well if your majesty will 
deign to listen to me i will not keep you in suspense any longer speak your 
majesty knows the baron du vallon yes indeed a good servant to my father the 
late king and an admirable companion at table for i think you are referring to 
him who dined with us at fontainebleau precisely but you have omitted to add to 
his other qualifications sire that he is a most charming killer of people what 
does m du vallon wish to kill you or to get me killed which is the same thing 
bless my heart do not laugh sire for i am not saying a word that is not the 
exact truth and you say he wishes to get you killed that is that excellent 
persons present idea be easy i will defend you if he be in the wrong ah there 
is an if of course answer me as candidly as if it were some one elses affair 
instead of your own my poor de saint-aignan is he right or wrong your majesty 
shall be the judge what have you done to him to him personally nothing at all 
but it seems i have to one of his friends it is all the same is his friend one 
of the celebrated four no it is only the son of one of the celebrated four what 
have you done to the son come tell me why i have helped some one to take his 
mistress from him you confess it then i cannot help confessing it for it is 
true in that case you are wrong ah i am wrong yes and my faith if he kills you 
well well he will do what is right ah that is your majestys way of reasoning 
then do you think it a bad way it is a very expeditious way good justice is 
prompt so my grandfather henry iv used to say in that case your majesty will 
immediately sign my adversarys pardon for he is now waiting for me at the 
minimes to kill me his name and a parchment there is a parchment upon your 
majestys table and as for his name well what is it the vicomte de bragelonne 
sire the vicomte de bragelonne exclaimed the king changing from a fit of 
laughter to the most profound stupor and then after a moments silence while he 
wiped his forehead which was bedewed with perspiration he again murmured 
bragelonne no other than he sire bragelonne who was affianced to yes sire he 
was in london however yes but i can assure you sire he is there no longer is he 
in paris he is at the minimes sire where he is waiting for me as i have already 
had the honor of telling you does he know all yes and many things besides 
perhaps your majesty would like to look at the letter i have received from him 
and de saint aignan drew from his pocket the note with which we are already 
acquainted when your majesty has read the letter i will tell you how it reached 
me the king read it in great agitation and immediately said well well sire your 
majesty knows a certain carved lock closing a certain door of ebony-wood which 
separates a certain apartment from a certain blue and white sanctuary of course 
louises boudoir yes sire well it was in the keyhole of that lock that i found 
that note who placed it there either m de bragelonne or the devil himself but 
inasmuch as the note smells of amber and not of sulphur i conclude that it must 
be not the devil but m de bragelonne louis bent down his head and seemed 
absorbed in sad and melancholy reflections perhaps something like remorse was 
at that moment passing through his heart oh he said that secret discovered sire 
i shall do my utmost that the secret dies in the breast of the man who 
possesses it said de saint-aignan in a tone of bravado as he moved towards the 
door but a gesture of the king made him pause where are you going he inquired 
where i am waited for sire what for to fight in all probability you fight 
exclaimed the king one moment if you please monsieur the count de saint-aignan 
shook his head as a rebellious child does whenever any one interferes to 
prevent him from throwing himself into a well or playing with a knife but yet 
sire he said in the first place continued the king i require to be enlightened 
a little upon that point if your majesty will be pleased to interrogate me 
replied de saint-aignan i will throw what light i can who told you that m de 
bragelonne had penetrated into that room the letter which i found in the 
keyhole told me so who told you that it was de bragelonne who put it there who 
but himself would have dared to undertake such a mission you are right how was 
he able to get into your rooms ah that is very serious inasmuch as all the 
doors were closed and my lackey basque had the keys in his pocket your lackey 
must have been bribed impossible sire for if he had been bribed those who did 
so would not have sacrificed the poor fellow whom it is not unlikely they might 
want to turn to further use by and by in showing so clearly that it was he of 
whom they had made use quite true and now there remains but one conjecture let 
us see sire if it is the same that has presented itself to my mind that he 
effected an entrance by means of the staircase alas sire that seems to me more 
than probable there is no doubt that some one sold the secret of the trap-door 
either sold it or gave it why do you make that distinction because there are 
certain persons sire who being above the price of a treason give and do not 
sell what do you mean oh sire your majestys mind is too clear-sighted not to 
guess what i mean and you will save me the embarrassment of naming any one you 
are right you mean madame ah said de saint-aignan madame whose suspicions were 
aroused by your changing your lodgings madame who has keys of the apartments of 
her maids of honor and is powerful enough to discover what no one but yourself 
or she would be able to discover and you suppose then that my sister has 
entered into an alliance with bragelonne eh eh sire so far as to inform him of 
all the details of the affair perhaps even further still further what do you 
mean perhaps to the point of going with him which way through your own 
apartments you think it impossible sire well listen to me your majesty knows 
that madame is very fond of perfumes yes she acquired that taste from my mother 
vervain particularly yes it is the scent she prefers to all others very good 
sire my apartments smell very strongly of vervain the king remained silent and 
thoughtful for a few moments and then resumed but why should madame take 
bragelonnes part against me de saint-aignan could very easily have replied a 
womans jealousy in his question the king had probed his friend to the bottom of 
his heart to ascertain if he had learned the secret of his flirtation with his 
sister-in-law but de saint-aignan was not an ordinary courtier he did not 
lightly run the risk of finding out family secrets and he was too good a friend 
of the muses not to think very frequently of poor ovidius naso whose eyes shed 
so many tears in expiation of his crime for having once beheld something one 
hardly knows what in the palace of augustus he therefore passed by madames 
secret very skilfully but since he had exhibited his sagacity in proving 
madames presence in his rooms with bragelonne it was now necessary for him to 
pay interest on that self-conceit and reply clearly to the question why has 
madame taken bragelonnes part against me why replied de saint-aignan your 
majesty forgets i presume that the comte de guiche is the intimate friend of 
the vicomte de bragelonne i do not see the connection however said the king ah 
i beg your pardon then sire but i thought the comte de guiche was a very great 
friend of madame quite true the king returned there is no occasion to search 
any further the blow came from that direction and is not your majesty of the 
opinion that in order to ward it off it will be necessary to deal another blow 
yes but not one of the kind given in the bois de vincennes replied the king you 
forget sire said de saint-aignan that i am a gentleman and that i have been 
challenged the challenge neither concerns nor was it intended for you but it is 
i who have been expected at the minimes sire during the last hour and more and 
i shall be dishonored if i do not go there the first honor and duty of a 
gentleman is obedience to his sovereign sire i order you to remain sire obey 
monsieur as your majesty pleases besides i wish to have the whole of this 
affair explained i wish to know how it is that i have been so insolently 
trifled with as to have the sanctuary of my affection pried into it is not you 
de saint-aignan who ought to punish those who have acted in this manner for it 
is not your honor they have attacked but my own i implore your majesty not to 
overwhelm m de bragelonne with your wrath for although in the whole of this 
affair he may have shown himself deficient in prudence he has not been so in 
his feelings of loyalty enough i shall know how to decide between the just and 
the unjust even in the height of my anger but take care that not a word of this 
is breathed to madame but what am i to do with regard to m de bragelonne he 
will be seeking me in every direction and i shall either have spoken to him or 
taken care that he has been spoken to before the evening is over let me once 
more entreat your majesty to be indulgent towards him i have been indulgent 
long enough count said louis xiv frowning it is time to show certain persons 
that i am master in my own palace the king had hardly pronounced these words 
which betokened that a fresh feeling of dissatisfaction was mingled with the 
remembrance of an old one when the usher appeared at the door of the cabinet 
what is the matter inquired the king and why do you presume to come when i have 
not summoned you sire said the usher your majesty desired me to permit m le 
comte de la fere to pass freely at any time when he might wish to speak to your 
majesty well m le comte de la fere is now waiting to see your majesty the king 
and de saint-aignan at this reply exchanged a look which betrayed more 
uneasiness than surprise louis hesitated for a moment but almost immediately 
forming a resolution he said go de saint-aignan and find louise inform her of 
the plot against us do not let her be ignorant that madame is beginning again 
her persecutions and that she has set to work those who would have done better 
had they remained neutral sire if louise gets nervous and frightened reassure 
her tell her that the kings love is an impenetrable shield over her if as i 
suspect is the case she already knows everything or if she has already been 
herself subjected to an attack tell her be sure to tell her de saint-aignan 
added the king trembling with passion tell her i say that this time instead of 
defending her i will avenge her and that too so terribly that no one will in 
future even dare to raise his eyes towards her is that all sire yes all go 
quickly and remain faithful you who live in the midst of this hell without 
having like myself the hope of paradise de saint-aignan almost exhausted 
himself in protestations of devotion took the kings hand kissed it and left the 
room radiant with delight chapter xix king and nobility the king endeavored to 
recover his self-possession as quickly as possible in order to meet m de la 
fere with an undisturbed countenance he clearly saw that it was not mere chance 
which had induced the counts visit he had a vague impression of the serious 
import of that visit but he felt that to a man of athoss tone of mind to a 
person so distinguished nothing disagreeable or disordered should be presented 
as soon as the king had satisfied himself that so far as appearances were 
concerned he was perfectly calm again he gave directions to the ushers to 
introduce the count a few minutes afterwards athos in full court dress and with 
his breast covered with the orders that he alone had the right to wear at the 
court of france presented himself with so grave and solemn an air that the king 
perceived at the first glance that he had not been mistaken in his 
anticipations louis advanced a step towards the count and with a smile held out 
his hand to him over which athos bowed with the air of the deepest respect m le 
comte de la fere said the king rapidly you are so seldom here that it is a very 
great happiness to see you athos bowed and replied i should wish always to 
enjoy the happiness of being near your majesty that reply made in that tone 
evidently signified i should wish to be one of your majestys advisers to save 
you from the commission of faults the king so understood it and determined in 
this mans presence to preserve all the advantages of calmness along with those 
of rank i see you have something to say to me he said had it not been so i 
should not have presumed to present myself before your majesty speak quickly i 
am anxious to satisfy you returned the king seating himself i am persuaded 
replied athos in a slightly agitated tone of voice that your majesty will give 
me every satisfaction ah said the king with a certain haughtiness of manner you 
have come to lodge a complaint here then it would be a complaint returned athos 
only in the event of your majesty but if you will deign to permit me sire i 
will begin the conversation at the beginning i am listening your majesty will 
remember that at the period of the duke of buckinghams departure i had the 
honor of an interview with you at or about that period i think i remember you 
did only with regard to the subject of the conversation i have quite forgotten 
it athos started as he replied i shall have the honor to recall it to your 
majesty it was with regard to a demand which i addressed to you respecting a 
marriage which m de bragelonne wished to contract with mademoiselle de la 
valliere ah thought the king we have come to it now i remember he said aloud at 
that period pursued athos your majesty was so kind and generous towards m de 
bragelonne and myself that not a single word which then fell from your lips has 
escaped my memory and when i asked your majesty to accord me mademoiselle de la 
vallieres hand for m de bragelonne you refused quite true said louis dryly 
alleging athos hastened to say that the young lady had no position in society 
louis could hardly force himself to listen patiently that added athos she had 
but little fortune the king threw himself back in his arm-chair that her 
extraction was indifferent a renewed impatience on the part of the king and 
little beauty added athos pitilessly this last bolt buried itself deep in the 
kings heart and made him almost bound from his seat you have a good memory 
monsieur he said i invariably have on all occasions when i have had the 
distinguished honor of an interview with your majesty retorted the count 
without being in the least disconcerted very good it is admitted i said all 
that and i thanked your majesty because those words testified an interest in m 
de bragelonne which did him much honor and you may possibly remember said the 
king very deliberately that you had the greatest repugnance to this marriage 
quite true sire and that you solicited my permission against your own 
inclination yes sire and finally i remember also for i have a memory nearly as 
good as your own i remember i say that you observed at the time i do not 
believe that mademoiselle de la valliere loves m de bragelonne is that true the 
blow told well but athos did not shrink sire he said i have already begged your 
majestys forgiveness but there are certain particulars in that conversation 
which will be intelligible in the denouement well what is the denouement 
monsieur this your majesty then said that you would defer the marriage out of 
regard for m de bragelonnes own interests the king remained silent m de 
bragelonne is now so exceedingly unhappy that he cannot any longer defer asking 
your majesty for a solution of the matter the king turned pale athos looked at 
him with fixed attention and what said the king with considerable hesitation 
does m de bragelonne request precisely the very thing that i came to ask your 
majesty for at my last audience namely your majestys consent to his marriage 
the king remained silent the obstacles in the way are all now quite removed for 
us continued athos mademoiselle de la valliere without fortune birth or beauty 
is not the less on that account the only good match in the world for m de 
bragelonne since he loves this young girl the king pressed his hands 
impatiently together does your majesty hesitate inquired the count without 
losing a particle either of his firmness or his politeness i do not hesitate i 
refuse replied the king athos paused a moment as if to collect himself i have 
had the honor he said in a mild tone to observe to your majesty that no 
obstacle now interferes with m de bragelonnes affections and that his 
determination seems unalterable there is my will and that is an obstacle i 
should imagine that is the most serious of all athos replied quickly ah and may 
we therefore be permitted to ask your majesty with the greatest humility for 
your reason for this refusal the reason a question to me exclaimed the king a 
demand sire the king leaning with both his hands upon the table said in a deep 
tone of concentrated passion you have lost all recollection of what is usual at 
court at court no one questions the king very true sire but if men do not 
question they conjecture conjecture what may that mean almost always the 
conjecture of the subject impugns the frankness of the king monsieur and a want 
of confidence on the part of the subject pursued athos intrepidly you are 
forgetting yourself said the king hurried away by his anger in spite of his 
control over himself sire i am obliged to seek elsewhere for what i thought i 
should find in your majesty instead of obtaining a reply from you i am 
compelled to make one for myself the king rose monsieur the count he said i 
have now given you all the time i had at my disposal this was a dismissal sire 
replied the count i have not yet had time to tell your majesty what i came with 
the express object of saying and i so rarely see your majesty that i ought to 
avail myself of the opportunity just now you spoke of conjectures you are now 
becoming offensive oh sire offend your majesty i never all my life have i 
maintained that kings are above all other men not only in rank and power but in 
nobleness of heart and dignity of mind i never can bring myself to believe that 
my sovereign he who passed his word to me did so with a mental reservation what 
do you mean what mental reservation i will explain my meaning said athos coldly 
if in refusing mademoiselle de la valliere to m de bragelonne your majesty had 
some other object in view than the happiness and fortune of the viscount you 
perceive monsieur that you are offending me if in requiring the viscount to 
delay his marriage your majestys only object was to remove the gentleman to 
whom mademoiselle de la valliere was engaged monsieur monsieur i have heard it 
said so in every direction sire your majestys love for mademoiselle de la 
valliere is spoken of on all sides the king tore his gloves which he had been 
biting for some time woe to those he cried who interfere in my affairs i have 
chosen my course i will crush all obstacles what obstacles said athos the king 
stopped short like a runaway horse whose bit being turned in his mouth bruises 
his palate i love mademoiselle de la valliere he said suddenly with nobleness 
and with passion but interrupted athos that does not preclude your majesty from 
allowing m de bragelonne to marry mademoiselle de la valliere the sacrifice is 
worthy of so great a monarch it is fully merited by m de bragelonne who has 
already rendered great service to your majesty and who may well be regarded as 
a brave and worthy man your majesty therefore in renouncing the affection you 
entertain offers a proof at once of generosity gratitude and good policy 
mademoiselle de la valliere does not love m de bragelonne said the king 
hoarsely does your majesty know that to be the case remarked athos with a 
searching look i do know it within a short time then for doubtless had your 
majesty known it when i first preferred my request you would have taken the 
trouble to inform me within a short time athos remained silent for a moment and 
then resumed in that case i do not understand why your majesty should have sent 
m de bragelonne to london that exile and with good reason is a matter of 
astonishment to all who love the honor of the king who presumes to speak of my 
honor m de la fere the kings honor sire is made up of the honor of his whole 
nobility whenever the king offends one of his gentlemen that is whenever he 
deprives him of the smallest particle of his honor it is from him from the king 
himself that that portion of honor is stolen m de la fere said the king 
haughtily sire you sent m de bragelonne to london either before you were 
mademoiselle de la vallieres lover or since you have become so the king 
irritated beyond measure especially because he felt that he was mastered 
endeavored to dismiss athos by a gesture sire replied the count i will tell you 
all i will not leave your presence until i have been satisfied either by your 
majesty or by myself satisfied if you prove to me that you are right satisfied 
if i prove to you that you are wrong oh you will listen to me sire i am old now 
and i am attached to everything that is really great and true in your kingdom i 
am a gentleman who shed my blood for your father and for yourself without ever 
having asked a single favor either from yourself or from your father i have 
never inflicted the slightest wrong or injury on any one in this world and have 
put kings under obligations to me you will listen to me i have come to ask you 
for an account of the honor of one of your servants whom you have deceived by a 
falsehood or betrayed through weakness i know that these words irritate your 
majesty but on the other hand the facts are killing us i know you are inquiring 
what penalty you will inflict for my frankness but i know what punishment i 
will implore god to inflict upon you when i set before him your perjury and my 
sons unhappiness the king during these remarks was walking hurriedly to and fro 
his hand thrust into the breast of his coat his head haughtily raised his eyes 
blazing with wrath monsieur he cried suddenly if i acted towards you as the 
king you would be already punished but i am only a man and i have the right to 
love in this world every one who loves me a happiness which is so rarely found 
you cannot pretend to such a right as a man any more than as a king sire or if 
you intended to exercise that right in a loyal manner you should have told m de 
bragelonne so and not have exiled him i think i am condescending to dispute 
with you monsieur interrupted louis xiv with that majesty of air and manner 
which he alone was able to give to his look and his voice i was hoping that you 
would reply to me said the count you shall know my reply monsieur very soon you 
already know my thoughts on the subject was the comte de la feres answer you 
have forgotten you are speaking to the king monsieur it is a crime you have 
forgotten you are destroying the lives of two men sire it is a mortal sin go at 
once not until i have said to you son of louis xiii you begin your reign badly 
for you begin it by abduction and disloyalty my race myself too are now freed 
from all that affection and respect towards you to which i bound my son by oath 
in the vaults of st denis in the presence of the relics of your noble 
forefathers you are now become our enemy sire and henceforth we have nothing to 
do save with heaven our sole master be warned do you threaten oh no said athos 
sadly i have as little bravado as fear in my soul the god of whom i spoke to 
you is now listening to me he knows that for the safety and honor of your crown 
i would even yet shed every drop of blood which twenty years of civil and 
foreign warfare have left in my veins i can well say then that i threaten the 
king as little as i threaten the man but i tell you sire you lose two servants 
for you have destroyed faith in the heart of the father and love in the heart 
of the son the one ceases to believe in the royal word the other no longer 
believes in the loyalty of man or the purity of woman the one is dead to every 
feeling of respect the other to obedience adieu thus saying athos broke his 
sword across his knee slowly placed the two pieces upon the floor and saluting 
the king who was almost choking from rage and shame quitted the cabinet louis 
who sat near the table completely overwhelmed spent several minutes in 
recovering himself then suddenly rose and rang the bell violently tell m 
dartagnan to come here he said to the terrified ushers chapter xx after the 
storm our readers will doubtless have been asking themselves how it happened 
that athos of whom not a word has been said for some time past arrived so very 
opportunely at court our claim as narrator being that we unfold events in exact 
logical sequence we hold ourselves ready to answer that question porthos 
faithful to his duty as an arranger of affairs had immediately after leaving 
the palais-royal set off to join raoul at the minimes in the bois de vincennes 
and had related everything even to the smallest details which had passed 
between de saint-aignan and himself he finished by saying that the message 
which the king had sent to his favorite would not probably occasion more than a 
short delay and that de saint-aignan as soon as he could leave the king would 
not lose a moment in accepting the invitation which raoul had sent him but 
raoul less credulous than his old friend had concluded from porthoss recital 
that if de saint-aignan was going to the king de saint-aignan would tell the 
king everything and that the king would therefore forbid de saint-aignan to 
obey the summons he had received to the hostile meeting the consequence of his 
reflections was that he had left porthos to remain at the place appointed for 
the meeting in the very improbable case that de saint-aignan would come there 
and had urged porthos not to remain there more than an hour or an hour and a 
half porthos however formally refused to assent to that but on the contrary 
installed himself in the minimes as if he were going to take root there making 
raoul promise that when he had been to see his father he would return to his 
own apartments in order that porthoss servant might know where to find him in 
case m de saint-aignan should happen to come to the rendezvous bragelonne had 
left vincennes and had proceeded at once straight to the apartments of athos 
who had been in paris during the last two days and had been already informed of 
what had taken place by a letter from dartagnan raoul arrived at his fathers 
athos after having held out his hand to him and embraced him most 
affectionately made a sign for him to sit down i know you come to me as a man 
would go to a friend viscount whenever he is suffering tell me therefore what 
it is that brings you now the young man bowed and began his recital more than 
once in the course of it his tears choked his utterance and a sob checked in 
his throat compelled him to pause in his narration however he finished at last 
athos most probably already knew how matters stood as we have just now said 
that dartagnan had already written to him but preserving until the conclusion 
that calm unruffled composure of manner which constituted the almost superhuman 
side of his character he replied raoul i do not believe there is a word of 
truth in the rumors i do not believe in the existence of what you fear although 
i do not deny that persons most entitled to the fullest credit have already 
conversed with me on the subject in my heart and soul i think it impossible 
that the king could be guilty of such an outrage upon a gentleman i will answer 
for the king therefore and will soon bring you back the proof of what i say 
raoul wavering like a drunken man between what he had seen with his own eyes 
and the imperturbable faith he had in a man who had never told a falsehood 
bowed and simply answered go then monsieur the count i will await your return 
and he sat down burying his face in his hands athos dressed and then left him 
in order to wait upon the king what occurred in the interview with the king is 
already known to our readers when he returned to his lodgings raoul pale and 
dejected had not quitted his attitude of despair at the sound however of the 
opening doors and of his fathers footsteps as he approached him the young man 
raised his head athoss face was very pale his head uncovered and his manner 
full of seriousness he gave his cloak and hat to the lackey dismissed him with 
a gesture and sat down near raoul well monsieur inquired the young man are you 
quite convinced now i am raoul the king loves mademoiselle de la valliere he 
confesses it then cried raoul yes replied athos and she i have not seen her no 
but the king spoke to you about her what did he say he says that she loves him 
oh you see you see monsieur said the young man with a gesture of despair raoul 
resumed the count i told the king believe me all that you yourself could 
possibly have said and i believe i did so in becoming language though 
sufficiently firm and what did you say to him monsieur i told him raoul that 
everything was now at an end between him and ourselves that you would never 
serve him again i told him that i too should remain aloof nothing further 
remains for me then but to be satisfied of one thing what is that monsieur 
whether you have determined to adopt any steps any steps regarding what with 
reference to your disappointed affection and finish monsieur and with reference 
to revenge for i fear that you think of avenging your wrongs oh monsieur with 
regard to my affection i shall perhaps some day or other succeed in tearing it 
from my heart i trust i shall do so aided by heavens merciful help and your 
wise exhortations so far as vengeance is concerned it occurred to me only when 
under the influence of an evil thought for i could not revenge myself upon the 
one who is actually guilty i have therefore already renounced every idea of 
revenge and so you no longer think of seeking a quarrel with m de saint-aignan 
no monsieur i sent him a challenge if he accepts it i will maintain it if he 
does not take it up i will leave it where it is and la valliere you cannot i 
know have seriously thought that i should dream of revenging myself upon a 
woman replied raoul with a smile so sad that a tear started even to the eyes of 
his father who had so many times in the course of his life been bowed beneath 
his own sorrows and those of others athos held out his hand to raoul which the 
latter seized most eagerly and so monsieur the count you are quite satisfied 
that the misfortune is without a remedy inquired the young man athos shook his 
head poor boy he murmured you think that i still hope said raoul and you pity 
me oh it is indeed a horrible suffering for me to despise as i ought to do her 
whom i have loved so devotedly if i but had some real cause of complaint 
against her i should be happy and should be able to forgive her athos looked at 
his son with a sorrowful air the few words which raoul had just pronounced 
seemed to have issued out of his own heart at this moment the servant announced 
m dartagnan this name sounded very differently to the ears of athos and of 
raoul the musketeer entered the room with a vague smile upon his lips raoul 
paused athos walked towards his friend with an expression of face which did not 
escape bragelonne dartagnan answered athoss look by a simple movement of the 
eyelid and then advancing toward raoul whom he took by the hand he said 
addressing both father and son well you are trying to console the boy it seems 
and you kind and good as usual are come to help me in my difficult task as he 
said this athos pressed dartagnans hand between both his own raoul fancied he 
observed in this pressure something beyond the sense his mere words conveyed 
yes replied the musketeer smoothing his mustache with the hand that athos had 
left free yes i have come also you are most welcome chevalier not for the 
consolation you bring with you but on your own account i am already consoled 
said raoul and he attempted to smile but the effect was far more sad than any 
tears dartagnan had ever seen shed that is all well and good then said 
dartagnan only continued raoul you have arrived just as the count was about to 
give me the details of his interview with the king you will allow the count to 
continue added the young man as with his eyes fixed on the musketeer he seemed 
to search the depths of his heart his interview with the king said dartagnan in 
a tone so natural and unassumed that there was no reason to doubt his 
astonishment you have seen the king then athos athos smiled as he said yes i 
have seen him ah indeed you were ignorant then that the count had seen his 
majesty inquired raoul half reassured my faith yes entirely in that case i am 
less uneasy said raoul uneasy and about what inquired athos forgive me monsieur 
said raoul but knowing so well the regard and affection you have for me i was 
afraid you might possibly have expressed somewhat plainly to his majesty my own 
sufferings and your indignation and that the king had consequently and that the 
king had consequently repeated dartagnan well go on finish what you were going 
to say i have now to ask you to forgive me m dartagnan said raoul for a moment 
and i cannot help confessing it i trembled lest you had come here not as m 
dartagnan but as captain of the musketeers you are mad my poor boy cried 
dartagnan with a burst of laughter in which an exact observer might perhaps 
have desired a little more frankness so much the better said raoul yes mad and 
do you know what i would advise you to do tell me monsieur for the advice is 
sure to be good as it comes from you very well then i advise you after your 
long journey from england after your visit to m de guiche after your visit to 
madame after your visit to porthos after your journey to vincennes i advise you 
i say to take a few hours rest go and lie down sleep for a dozen hours and when 
you wake up go and ride one of my horses until you have tired him to death and 
drawing raoul towards him dartagnan embraced him as if he were his own child 
athos did the like only it was very apparent that the fathers kiss was more 
tender and his embrace closer than those of the friend the young man again 
looked at his companions endeavoring with the utmost strength of his 
intelligence to read what was in their minds but his look was powerless upon 
the smiling countenance of the musketeer or upon the calm and composed features 
of the comte de la fere where are you going raoul inquired the latter seeing 
that bragelonne was preparing to go out to my own apartments replied raoul in 
his soft and sad voice we shall be sure to find you there then if we should 
have anything to say to you yes monsieur but do you suppose it likely you will 
have something to say to me how can i tell said athos yes new consolations said 
dartagnan pushing him gently towards the door raoul observing the perfect 
composure which marked every gesture of his two friends quitted the counts room 
carrying away with him nothing but the individual feeling of his own particular 
distress thank heaven he said since that is the case i need only think of 
myself and wrapping himself in his cloak in order to conceal from the 
passers-by in the streets his gloomy face he started out to return to his own 
rooms as he had promised porthos the two friends watched the young man as he 
walked away with a feeling akin to pity only each expressed it in a very 
different way poor raoul said athos sighing deeply poor raoul said dartagnan 
shrugging his shoulders chapter xxi heu miser poor raoul athos had said poor 
raoul dartagnan had said to be pitied by both these men raoul must indeed have 
been most unhappy and when he found himself alone face to face as it were with 
his own troubles leaving behind him the intrepid friend and the indulgent 
father when he recalled the avowal of the kings affection which had robbed him 
of louise de la valliere whom he loved so deeply he felt his heart almost 
breaking as indeed we all have at least once in our lives at the first illusion 
destroyed at the first love betrayed oh he murmured all is over then nothing is 
now left me in this world nothing to look for nothing to hope for guiche has 
told me so my father has told me so and m dartagnan likewise everything is a 
mere idle dream in this life that future which i have been hopelessly pursuing 
for the last ten years a dream that union of our hearts a dream that life 
formed of love and happiness a dream poor fool to publish my dreams in the face 
of my friends and my enemies that my friends may be saddened by my troubles and 
my enemies may laugh at my sorrows so my unhappiness will soon become a 
notorious disgrace a public scandal so to-morrow i shall be ignominiously 
pointed at despite the composure which he had promised his father and dartagnan 
to observe raoul could not resist uttering a few words of dark menace and yet 
he continued if my name were de wardes and if i had the pliant character and 
strength of will of m dartagnan i should laugh with my lips at least i should 
convince other women that this perfidious girl honored by my love leaves me 
only one regret that of having been deceived by her counterfeit of honesty some 
men might perhaps make favor with the king at my expense i should put myself on 
the track of those jesters i should chastise a few of them the men would fear 
me and by the time i had laid three at my feet i should be adored by the women 
yes yes that indeed would be the proper course to adopt and the comte de la 
fere himself would not object to it has not he also been tried in his earlier 
days in the same manner as i have just been tried myself did he not replace 
love by intoxication he has often told me so why should not i replace love by 
pleasure he must have suffered as much as i suffer even more so perhaps the 
history of one man is the history of all men a lengthened trial of greater or 
less duration more or less bitter or sorrowful the voice of human nature is 
nothing but one prolonged cry but what are the sufferings of others compared to 
those from which i am now suffering does the open wound in anothers breast 
soften the pain of the gaping wound in our own or does the blood which is 
welling from another mans side stanch that which is pouring from our own does 
the general anguish of our fellow-creatures lessen our own private and 
particular anguish no no each suffers on his own account each struggles with 
his own grief each sheds his own tears and besides what has my life been up to 
the present moment a cold barren sterile arena in which i have always fought 
for others never for myself sometimes for a king sometimes for a woman the king 
has betrayed me the woman disdained me miserable unhappy wretch that i am women 
can i not make all expiate the crime of one of their sex what does that require 
to have a heart no longer or to forget that i ever had one to be strong even 
against weakness itself to lean always even when one feels that the support is 
giving way what is needed to attain that result to be young handsome strong 
valiant rich i am or shall be all that but honor what is honor after all a 
theory which every man understands in his own way my father tells me honor is 
the consideration of what is due to others and particularly of what one owes to 
ones self but de guiche and manicamp and de saint-aignan particularly would say 
to me honor consists in serving the passions and pleasures of ones king honor 
such as that indeed is easy and productive enough with honor like that i can 
keep my post at the court become a gentleman of the chamber and have the 
command of a regiment with honor such as that i can be both duke and peer the 
stain which that woman has just stamped upon me the grief with which she has 
just broken my heart mine raouls her friend from childhood in no way affect m 
de bragelonne an excellent officer a courageous leader who will cover himself 
with glory at the first encounter and who will become a hundred times greater 
than mademoiselle de la valliere is to-day the mistress of the king for the 
king will not marry her and the more publicly he proclaims her as his mistress 
the more will he enlarge the band of shame which he places as a crown upon her 
brow and when others shall despise her as i despise her i shall have become 
famous alas we had walked together side by side she and i during the earliest 
the brightest and best portion of our existence hand in hand along the charming 
path of life covered with the flowers of youth and now we come to a cross road 
where she separates herself from me whence we shall follow different roads 
which will lead us always farther apart and to attain the end of this path oh 
heaven i am alone i am in despair i am crushed oh unhappy man that i am such 
were the sinister reflections in which raoul was indulging when his foot 
mechanically paused at the door of his own dwelling he had reached it without 
noticing the streets through which he had passed without knowing how he had 
come he pushed open the door continued to advance and ascended the staircase 
the staircase as in most of the houses at that period was very dark and the 
landings were obscure raoul lived on the first floor he paused in order to ring 
olivain appeared and took raouls sword and cloak from his hands raoul himself 
opened the door which from the antechamber led into a small salon richly 
furnished enough for the salon of a young man and completely filled with 
flowers by olivain who knowing his masters tastes had shown himself studiously 
attentive in gratifying them without caring whether his master perceived his 
attention or not there was a portrait of la valliere in the salon which had 
been drawn by herself and given by her to raoul this portrait fastened above a 
large easy-chair covered with dark-colored damask was the first point towards 
which raoul bent his steps the first object on which he fixed his eyes it was 
moreover raouls usual habit to do so every time he entered his room this 
portrait before anything else attracted his attention this time as usual he 
walked straight up to the portrait placed his knees upon the armchair and 
paused to look at it sadly his arms were crossed upon his breast his head 
slightly thrown back his eyes filled with tears his lips curved in a bitter 
smile he looked at the portrait of her whom he so tenderly loved and then all 
that he had said passed before his mind again and all that he had suffered 
assailed his heart after a long silence he murmured for the third time 
miserable unhappy wretch that i am he had hardly pronounced these words when he 
heard the sound of a sigh and a groan behind him he turned sharply round and 
perceived in the angle of the salon standing up a bending veiled female figure 
which the opening door had concealed as he entered and which since he had not 
turned around he had not perceived he advanced towards this figure whose 
presence in his room had not been announced to him and as he bowed and inquired 
at the same moment who she was she suddenly raised her head and removed the 
veil from her face revealing her pale and sorrow-stricken features raoul 
staggered back as if he had seen a ghost louise he cried in a tone of such 
despair as one could hardly believe the human voice could express without 
breaking all the fibres of the heart chapter xxii wounds upon wounds 
mademoiselle de la valliere for it was indeed she advanced a few steps toward 
him yes louise she murmured but this interval short as it had been was quite 
sufficient for raoul to recover himself you mademoiselle he said and then added 
in an indefinable tone you here yes raoul the young girl replied i have been 
waiting for you i beg your pardon when i came into the room i was not aware i 
know but i entreated olivain not to tell you louise hesitated and as raoul did 
not attempt to interrupt her a moments silence ensued during which the sound of 
their throbbing hearts might have been heard no longer in unison with each 
other but the one beating as violently as the other it was for louise to speak 
and she made an effort to do so i wished to speak to you she said it was 
absolutely necessary that i should see you myself alone i have not hesitated to 
adopt a step which must remain secret for no one except yourself could 
understand my motive m de bragelonne in fact mademoiselle raoul stammered out 
almost breathless from emotion so far as i am concerned and despite the good 
opinion you have of me i confess will you do me the great kindness to sit down 
and listen to me said louise interrupting him with her soft sweet voice 
bragelonne looked at her for a moment then mournfully shaking his head he sat 
or rather fell down on a chair speak he said louise cast a glance all round her 
this look was a timid entreaty and implored secrecy far more effectually than 
her expressed words had done a few minutes before raoul rose and went to the 
door which he opened olivain he said i am not within for anyone and then 
turning towards louise he added is not that what you wished nothing could have 
produced a greater effect upon louise than these few words which seemed to 
signify you see that i still understand you she passed a handkerchief across 
her eyes in order to remove a rebellious tear and then having collected herself 
for a moment she said raoul do not turn your kind frank look away from me you 
are not one of those men who despise a woman for having given her heart to 
another even though that love might render him unhappy or might wound his pride 
raoul did not reply alas continued la valliere it is only too true my cause is 
a bad one and i know not in what way to begin it will be better for me i think 
to relate to you very simply everything that has befallen me as i shall speak 
the truth i shall always find my path clear before me in the obscurity 
hesitation and obstacles which i have to brave in order to solace my heart 
which is full to overflowing and wishes to pour itself out at your feet raoul 
continued to preserve the same unbroken silence la valliere looked at him with 
an air that seemed to say encourage me for pitys sake but a single word but 
raoul did not open his lips and the young girl was obliged to continue just now 
she said m de saint-aignan came to me by the kings directions she cast down her 
eyes as she said this while raoul on his side turned his away in order to avoid 
looking at her m de saint-aignan came to me from the king she repeated and told 
me that you knew all and she attempted to look raoul in the face after 
inflicting this further wound upon him in addition to the many others he had 
already received but it was impossible to meet raouls eyes he told me you were 
incensed with me justly so i admit this time raoul looked at the young girl and 
a smile full of disdain passed across his lips oh she continued i entreat you 
do not say that you have had any other feeling against me than that of anger 
merely raoul wait until i have told you all wait until i have said to you all 
that i had to say all that i came to say raoul by the strength of his own iron 
will forced his features to assume a calmer expression and the disdainful smile 
upon his lip passed away in the first place said la valliere in the first place 
with my hands raised in entreaty towards you with my forehead bowed to the 
ground before you i entreat you as the most generous as the noblest of men to 
pardon to forgive me if i have left you in ignorance of what was passing in my 
own bosom never at least would i have consented to deceive you oh i entreat you 
raoul i implore you on my knees answer me one word even though you wrong me in 
doing so better an injurious word from your lips than a suspicion in your heart 
i admire your subtlety of expression mademoiselle said raoul making an effort 
to remain calm to leave another in ignorance that you are deceiving him is 
loyal but to deceive him it seems that that would be very wrong and that you 
would not do it monsieur for a long time i thought that i loved you better than 
anything else and so long as i believed in my love for you i told you that i 
loved you at blois i loved you the king visited blois i believed i loved you 
still i could have sworn it on the altar but a day came when i was undeceived 
well on that day mademoiselle knowing that i still continued to love you true 
loyalty of conduct ought to have obliged you to tell me you had ceased to love 
me but on that day raoul on that day when i read in the depths of my own heart 
when i confessed to myself that you no longer filled my mind entirely when i 
saw another future before me than that of being your friend your life-long 
companion your wife on that day raoul you were not alas any more beside me but 
you knew where i was mademoiselle you could have written to me raoul i did not 
dare to do so raoul i have been weak and cowardly i knew you so thoroughly i 
knew how devotedly you loved me that i trembled at the bare idea of the sorrow 
i was going to cause you and that is so true raoul that at this very moment i 
am now speaking to you bending thus before you my heart crushed in my bosom my 
voice full of sighs my eyes full of tears it is so perfectly true that i have 
no other defence than my frankness i have no other sorrow greater than that 
which i read in your eyes raoul attempted to smile no said the young girl with 
a profound conviction no no you will not do me so foul a wrong as to disguise 
your feelings before me now you loved me you were sure of your affection for me 
you did not deceive yourself you did not lie to your own heart while i i and 
pale as death her arms thrown despairingly above her head she fell on her knees 
while you said raoul you told me you loved me and yet you loved another alas 
yes cried the poor girl alas yes i do love another and that other oh for 
heavens sake let me say it raoul for it is my only excuse that other i love 
better than my own life better than my own soul even forgive my fault or punish 
my treason raoul i came here in no way to defend myself but merely to say to 
you you know what it is to love well i love i love to that degree that i would 
give my life my very soul to the man i love if he should ever cease to love me 
i shall die of grief and despair unless god helps me unless the lord shows pity 
upon me raoul i came here to submit myself to your will whatever it might be to 
die if it were your wish i should die kill me then raoul if in your heart you 
believe i deserve death take care mademoiselle said raoul the woman who invites 
death is one who has nothing but her hearts blood to offer to her deceived and 
betrayed lover you are right she said raoul uttered a deep sigh as he exclaimed 
and you love without being able to forget i love without a wish to forget 
without a wish ever to love any one else replied la valliere very well said 
raoul you have said to me in fact all you had to say all i could possibly wish 
to know and now mademoiselle it is i who ask your forgiveness for it is i who 
have almost been an obstacle in your life i too have been wrong for in 
deceiving myself i helped to deceive you oh said la valliere i do not ask you 
so much as that raoul i only am to blame mademoiselle continued raoul better 
informed than yourself of the difficulties of this life i should have 
enlightened you i ought not to have relied upon uncertainty i ought to have 
extracted an answer from your heart while i hardly even sought an 
acknowledgement from your lips once more mademoiselle it is i who ask your 
forgiveness impossible impossible she cried you are mocking me how impossible 
yes it is impossible to be good and excellent and perfect to that extent take 
care said raoul with a bitter smile for presently you may say perhaps that i 
did not love you oh you love me like an affectionate brother let me hope that 
raoul as a brother undeceive yourself louise i loved you as a lover as a 
husband with the deepest the truest the fondest affection raoul raoul as a 
brother oh louise i loved you so much i would have given all my blood for you 
drop by drop all my flesh shred by shred all my eternity hour by hour raoul 
raoul for pitys sake i loved you so much louise that my heart is dead my faith 
extinguished my eyes have lost their light i loved you so much that i see 
nothing more either on earth or in heaven raoul dear raoul spare me i implore 
you cried la valliere oh if i had known it is too late louise you love you are 
happy i read your happiness through your tears behind the tears which the 
loyalty of your nature makes you shed i feel the sighs which your love breathes 
forth louise louise you have made me the most abjectly wretched man living 
leave me i entreat you adieu adieu forgive me i entreat you have i not done 
more have i not told you that i love you still she buried her face in her hands 
and to tell you that do you understand me louise to tell you that at such a 
moment as this to tell you that as i have told you is to pronounce my own 
sentence of death adieu la valliere wished to hold out her hands to him we 
ought not to see each other again in this world he said and as she was on the 
point of calling out in bitter agony at this remark he placed his hand on her 
mouth to stifle the exclamation she pressed her lips upon it and fell fainting 
olivain said raoul take this young lady and bear her to the carriage which is 
waiting for her at the door as olivain lifted her up raoul made a movement 
towards la valliere as if to give her a first and last kiss but stopping 
abruptly he said no she is not mine i am not the king of france to steal and he 
returned to his room while the lackey carried la valliere still fainting to the 
carriage chapter xxiii what raoul had guessed after raouls departure and the 
two exclamations which had followed him athos and dartagnan found themselves 
alone face to face athos immediately resumed the earnest manner which had 
possessed him when dartagnan arrived well athos said what have you come to 
announce to me my friend i inquired dartagnan yes i do not see you in this way 
without some reason for it said athos smiling the deuce said dartagnan i will 
place you at your ease the king is furious is he not well i must say he is not 
altogether pleased and you have come by his direction yes to arrest me then my 
dear friend you have hit the very mark oh i expected it come oh oh the devil 
said dartagnan what a hurry you are in i am afraid of delaying you said athos 
smiling i have plenty of time are you not curious besides to know how things 
went on between the king and me if you will be good enough to tell me i will 
listen with the greatest pleasure said athos pointing out to dartagnan a large 
chair in which the latter stretched himself in an easy attitude well i will do 
so willingly enough continued dartagnan for the conversation is rather 
interesting in the first place the king sent for me as soon as i had left you 
were just going down the last steps of the staircase as the musketeers told me 
i arrived my dear athos the king was not red in the face merely he was 
positively purple i was not aware of course of what had passed only i saw a 
sword broken in two lying on the floor captain dartagnan cried the king as soon 
as he saw me sire i replied i abandon m de la fere he is an insolent man an 
insolent man i exclaimed in such a tone that the king stopped suddenly short 
captain dartagnan resumed the king with his teeth clinched you will listen to 
me and obey me that is my duty sire i have wished to spare that gentleman of 
whom i retain some kind recollections the affront of having him arrested in my 
presence ah ah i said quietly but you will take a carriage at this i made a 
slight movement if you object to arrest him yourself continued the king send me 
my captain of the guards sire i replied there is no necessity for the captain 
of the guards since i am on duty i should not like to annoy you said the king 
kindly for you have always served me well m dartagnan you do not annoy me sire 
i replied i am on duty that is all but said the king in astonishment i believe 
the count is your friend if he were my father sire it would not make me less on 
duty than i am the king looked at me he saw how unmoved my face was and seemed 
satisfied you will arrest m le comte de la fere then he inquired most certainly 
sire if you give me the order to do so very well i order you to do so i bowed 
and replied where is the count sire you will look for him and i am to arrest 
him wherever he may be yes but at his own house if possible if he has started 
for his own estate leave paris at once and arrest him on his way thither i 
bowed but as i did not move he said well i am waiting sire what are you waiting 
for for the signed order the king seemed annoyed for in point of fact it was 
the exercise of a fresh act of authority a repetition of the arbitrary act if 
indeed it is to be considered as such he took his pen slowly and in no very 
good temper then he wrote order for m le chevalier dartagnan captain of my 
musketeers to arrest m le comte de la fere wherever he is to be found he then 
turned towards me but i was looking on without moving a muscle of my face in 
all probability he thought he perceived something like bravado in my tranquil 
manner for he signed hurriedly and then handing me the order he said go i 
obeyed and here i am athos pressed his friends hand well let us set off he said 
oh surely said dartagnan you must have some trifling matters to arrange before 
you leave your apartments in this manner i not at all why not why you know 
dartagnan i have always been a very simple traveller on this earth ready to go 
to the end of the world by order of my sovereign ready to quit it at the 
summons of my maker what does a man who is thus prepared require in such a case 
a portmanteau or a shroud i am ready at this moment as i have always been dear 
friend and can accompany you at once but bragelonne i have brought him up in 
the same principles i laid down for my own guidance and you observed that as 
soon as he perceived you he guessed that very moment the motive of your visit 
we have thrown him off his guard for a moment but do not be uneasy he is 
sufficiently prepared for my disgrace not to be too much alarmed at it so let 
us go very well let us go said dartagnan quietly as i broke my sword in the 
kings presence and threw the pieces at his feet i presume that will dispense 
with the necessity of delivering it over to you you are quite right and besides 
that what the devil do you suppose i could do with your sword am i to walk 
behind or before you inquired athos laughing you will walk arm-in-arm with me 
replied dartagnan as he took the counts arm to descend the staircase and in 
this manner they arrived at the landing grimaud whom they had met in the 
anteroom looked at them as they went out together in this manner with some 
little uneasiness his experience of affairs was quite sufficient to give him 
good reason to suspect that there was something wrong ah is that you grimaud 
said athos kindly we are going to take a turn in my carriage interrupted 
dartagnan with a friendly nod of the head grimaud thanked dartagnan by a 
grimace which was evidently intended for a smile and accompanied the two 
friends to the door athos entered first into the carriage dartagnan followed 
him without saying a word to the coachman the departure had taken place so 
quietly that it excited no disturbance or attention even in the neighborhood 
when the carriage had reached the quays you are taking me to the bastille i 
perceive said athos i said dartagnan i take you wherever you may choose to go 
nowhere else i can assure you what do you mean said the count surprised pardieu 
said dartagnan you quite understand that i undertook the mission with no other 
object in view than that of carrying it out exactly as you liked you did not 
think that i would have you thrown into prison like that brutally without 
reflection if i had not anticipated that i should have let the captain of the 
guards undertake it and so said athos and so i repeat we will go wherever you 
may choose my dear friend said athos embracing dartagnan how like you that is 
well it seems simple enough to me the coachman will take you to the barrier of 
the cours-la-reine you will find a horse there which i have ordered to be kept 
ready for you with that horse you will be able to do three posts without 
stopping and i on my side will take care not to return to the king to tell him 
that you have gone away until it will be impossible to overtake you in the mean 
time you will have reached havre and from havre you will go to england where 
you will find the charming residence which my friend m monk gave me to say 
nothing of the hospitality which king charles will not fail to show you well 
what do you think of this project take me to the bastille said athos smiling 
you are an obstinate-headed fellow dear athos returned dartagnan reflect for a 
few moments upon what that you are no longer twenty years of age believe me i 
speak according to my own knowledge and experience a prison is certain death 
for men of our time of life no no i will never allow you to languish in prison 
why the very thought of it turns my head dear dartagnan athos replied happily 
god made me as strong in body as in mind and rely upon it i shall be strong up 
to my last breath but this is not force it is folly no dartagnan it is the 
highest order of reasoning do not suppose that i should in the slightest degree 
in the world discuss the question with you whether you would not be ruined in 
endeavoring to save me i should have done precisely as you have arranged if 
flight had seemed proper to me i should therefore have accepted from you what 
without any doubt you would have accepted from me no i know you too well even 
to breathe a word upon the subject ah if you would only let me do it said 
dartagnan how i would send the king running after you he is the king dear 
friend oh that is all the same to me and king though he be i would plainly tell 
him sire imprison exile kill every one in france and europe order me to arrest 
and even poniard whom you like even were it monsieur your own brother but do 
not touch one of the four musketeers or if so mordioux my dear friend replied 
athos quietly i should like to persuade you of one thing namely that i wish to 
be arrested that i desire above all things that my arrest should take place 
dartagnan made a movement of his shoulders what does that mean it is so if you 
were to let me escape it would be only to return of my own accord and 
constitute myself a prisoner i wish to prove to this young man who is dazzled 
by the power and splendor of his crown that he can be regarded as the first 
among men only by proving himself to be the most generous and the wisest among 
them he may punish imprison or torture me it matters not he abuses his 
opportunities and i wish him to learn the bitterness of remorse while heaven 
teaches him what a chastisement is well replied dartagnan i know only too well 
that when you have once said no you mean no i do not insist any longer you wish 
to go to the bastille i do wish to go there let us go then to the bastille 
cried dartagnan to the coachman and throwing himself back in the carriage he 
gnawed the ends of his mustache with a fury which to athos who knew him well 
signified a resolution either already taken or in course of formation a 
profound silence ensued in the carriage which continued to roll on but neither 
faster nor slower than before athos took the musketeer by the hand you are not 
angry with me dartagnan he said i oh no certainly not of course not what you do 
from heroism i should have done from obstinacy but you are quite of opinion are 
you not that heaven will avenge me dartagnan and i know some persons on earth 
who will lend a helping hand said the captain chapter xxiv three guests 
astonished to find themselves at supper together the carriage arrived at the 
outer gate of the bastille a soldier on guard stopped it but dartagnan had only 
to utter a single word to procure admittance and the carriage passed on while 
they were proceeding along the covered way which led to the courtyard of the 
governors residence dartagnan whose lynx eye saw everything even through the 
walls suddenly cried out what is that out yonder well said athos quietly what 
is it look yonder athos in the courtyard yes yes make haste well a carriage 
very likely conveying a prisoner like myself that would be too droll i do not 
understand you make haste and look again and look at the man who is just 
getting out of that carriage at that very moment a second sentinel stopped 
dartagnan and while the formalities were gone through athos could see at a 
hundred paces from him the man whom his friend had pointed out to him he was in 
fact getting out of the carriage at the door of the governors house well 
inquired dartagnan do you see him yes he is a man in a gray suit what do you 
say of him i cannot very well tell he is as i have just now told you a man in a 
gray suit who is getting out of a carriage that is all athos i will wager 
anything it is he he who aramis aramis arrested impossible i do not say he is 
arrested since we see him alone in his carriage well then what is he doing here 
oh he knows baisemeaux the governor replied the musketeer slyly my faith we 
have arrived just in time what for in order to see what we can see i regret 
this meeting exceedingly when aramis sees me he will be very much annoyed in 
the first place at seeing me and in the next at being seen very well reasoned 
unfortunately there is no remedy for it whenever any one meets another in the 
bastille even if he wished to draw back to avoid him it would be impossible 
athos i have an idea the question is to spare aramis the annoyance you were 
speaking of is it not what is to be done i will tell you or in order to better 
explain myself let me relate the affair in my own manner i will not recommend 
you to tell a falsehood for that would be impossible for you to do well what is 
it well i will lie for both of us it is so easy to do that with the nature and 
habits of a gascon athos smiled the carriage stopped where the one we have just 
now pointed out had stopped namely at the door of the governors house it is 
understood then said dartagnan in a low voice to his friend athos consented by 
a gesture they ascended the staircase there will be no occasion for surprise at 
the facility with which they had entered the bastille if it be remembered that 
before passing the first gate in fact the most difficult of all dartagnan had 
announced that he had brought a prisoner of state at the third gate on the 
contrary that is to say when he had once fairly entered the prison he merely 
said to the sentinel to m baisemeaux and they both passed on in a few minutes 
they were in the governors dining-room and the first face which attracted 
dartagnans observation was that of aramis who was seated side by side with 
baisemeaux and awaited the announcement of a good meal whose odor impregnated 
the whole apartment if dartagnan pretended surprise aramis did not pretend at 
all he started when he saw his two friends and his emotion was very apparent 
athos and dartagnan however made their salutations and baisemeaux amazed 
completely stupefied by the presence of those three guests began to perform a 
few evolutions around them ah there said aramis by what chance we were just 
going to ask you retorted dartagnan are we going to give ourselves up as 
prisoners cried aramis with an affectation of hilarity ah ah said dartagnan it 
is true the walls smell deucedly like a prison m de baisemeaux you know you 
invited me to sup with you the other day i cried baisemeaux ah one would say 
you had fallen from the clouds you do not recall it baisemeaux turned pale and 
then red looked at aramis who looked at him and finally stammered certainly i 
am delighted but upon my honor i have not the slightest ah i have such a 
wretched memory well i am wrong i see said dartagnan as if he were offended 
wrong how wrong to remember it seems baisemeaux hurried towards him do not 
stand on ceremony my dear captain he said i have the poorest head in the 
kingdom take me from my pigeons and their pigeon-house and i am no better than 
the rawest recruit at all events you remember it now said dartagnan boldly yes 
yes replied the governor hesitating i think i remember it was when you came to 
the palace to see me you told me some story or other about your accounts with m 
de louviere and m de tremblay oh yes perfectly and about m dherblays kindness 
to you ah exclaimed aramis looking the unhappy governor full in the face and 
yet you just now said you had no memory m de baisemeaux baisemeaux interrupted 
the musketeer in the midst of his revelations yes yes youre quite right it 
seems to me that i am still there i beg a thousand pardons but now once for all 
my dear m dartagnan be sure that at this present time as at any other whether 
invited or not you are master here you and m dherblay your friend he said 
turning towards aramis and this gentleman too he added bowing to athos well i 
thought it would be sure to turn out so replied dartagnan this is the occasion 
of my coming having nothing to do this evening at the palais-royal i wished to 
judge for myself what your ordinary style of living was like and as i was 
coming along i met monsieur the count athos bowed the count who had just left 
his majesty handed me an order which required immediate attention we were close 
by here i wished to call in even if it were for no other object than that of 
shaking hands with you and of presenting the count to you of whom you spoke so 
highly in the kings presence that very evening when certainly certainly m le 
comte de la fere is it not precisely monsieur the count is welcome and he will 
sup with you two i suppose while i unfortunate dog that i am must run off on a 
matter of duty oh what happy beings you are compared to myself dartagnan added 
sighing as loud as porthos might have done and so you are going away said 
aramis and baisemeaux together with the same expression of delighted surprise 
the tone of which was immediately noticed by dartagnan i leave you in my place 
he said a noble and excellent guest and he touched athos gently on the shoulder 
who astonished also could not help exhibiting his surprise a little which was 
noticed by aramis only for m de baisemeaux was not quite equal to the three 
friends in point of intelligence what are you going to leave us resumed the 
governor i shall be away only about an hour or an hour and a half i will return 
in time for dessert oh we will wait for you said baisemeaux no no that would be 
really disobliging me you will be sure to return though said athos with an 
expression of doubt most certainly he said pressing his friends hand 
confidentially and he added in a low voice wait for me athos be cheerful and 
lively as possible and above all dont allude to business affairs for heavens 
sake and a renewed pressure of the hand impressed upon the count the necessity 
of being discreet and impenetrable baisemeaux led dartagnan to the gate aramis 
with many friendly protestations of delight sat down by athos determined to 
make him speak but athos possessed all the virtues in their highest excellence 
if necessity had required it he would have been the finest orator in the world 
but when there was need of silence he would die rather than utter a syllable 
ten minutes after dartagnans departure the three gentlemen sat down to table 
which was covered with the most substantial display of gastronomic luxury large 
joints exquisite dishes preserves the greatest variety of wines appeared 
successively upon the table which was served at the kings expense and of which 
expense m colbert would have no difficulty in saving two thirds without any one 
in the bastille being the worse for it baisemeaux was the only one who ate and 
drank resolutely aramis allowed nothing to pass by him but merely touched 
everything he took athos after the soup and three hors doeuvres ate nothing 
more the style of conversation was such as it necessarily would be between 
three men so opposite in temper and ideas aramis was incessantly asking himself 
by what extraordinary chance athos was at baisemeauxs when dartagnan was no 
longer there and why dartagnan did not remain when athos was there athos 
sounded all the depths of the mind of aramis who lived in the midst of 
subterfuge evasion and intrigue he studied his man well and thoroughly and felt 
convinced that he was engaged upon some important project and then he too began 
to think of his own personal affair and to lose himself in conjectures as to 
dartagnans reason for having left the bastille so abruptly and for leaving 
behind him a prisoner so badly introduced and so badly looked after by the 
prison authorities but we shall not pause to examine into the thoughts and 
feelings of these personages we will leave them to themselves surrounded by the 
remains of poultry game and fish mutilated by the generous knife of baisemeaux 
we are going to follow dartagnan instead who getting into the carriage which 
had brought him cried out to the coachman to the king and burn the pavement 
chapter xxv what took place at the louvre during the supper at the bastille m 
de saint-aignan had executed the commission with which the king had intrusted 
him for la valliere as we have already seen in one of the preceding chapters 
but whatever his eloquence might have been he did not succeed in persuading the 
young girl that she had in the king a protector powerful enough for her under 
any combination of circumstances and that she had no need of any one else in 
the world when the king was on her side in point of fact at the very first word 
which the favorite mentioned of the discovery of the famous secret louise in a 
passion of tears abandoned herself in utter despair to a sorrow which would 
have been far from flattering for the king if he had been a witness of it from 
a corner of the room de saint-aignan in his character of ambassador felt 
greatly offended at it as his master himself would have been and returned to 
announce to the king what he had seen and heard it is there that we now find 
him in a state of great agitation in the presence of the king still more 
agitated than he but said the king to the courtier when the latter had finished 
his report what did she decide to do shall i at least see her presently before 
supper will she come to me or shall i be obliged to go to her room i believe 
sire that if your majesty wishes to see her you will not only have to take the 
first step in advance but will have to go the whole way nothing for me does 
that bragelonne still possess her heart muttered the king between his teeth oh 
sire that is not possible for it is you alone whom mademoiselle de la valliere 
loves and that too with all her heart but you know that de bragelonne belongs 
to that proud race who play the part of roman heroes the king smiled feebly he 
knew how true the illustration was for athos had just left him as for 
mademoiselle de la valliere de saint-aignan continued she was brought up under 
the care of the dowager madame that is to say in austere retirement this 
engaged young couple coldly exchanged their little vows in the presence of the 
moon and the stars and now when they find they have to break those vows it 
plays the very deuce with them de saint-aignan thought he should have made the 
king laugh but on the contrary from a mere smile louis passed to the greatest 
seriousness of manner he already began to experience that remorse which the 
count had promised dartagnan he would inflict upon him he reflected that in 
fact these young persons had loved and sworn fidelity to each other that one of 
the two had kept his word and that the other was too conscientious not to feel 
her perjury most bitterly and with remorse jealousy sharply pricked the kings 
heart he did not say another word and instead of going to pay a visit to his 
mother or the queen or madame in order to amuse himself a little and make the 
ladies laugh as he himself used to say he threw himself into the huge arm-chair 
in which his august father louis xiii had passed so many weary days and years 
in company with baradas and cinq-mars de saint-aignan perceived that the king 
was not to be amused at that moment he tried a last resource and pronounced 
louises name which made the king look up immediately what does your majesty 
intend to do this evening shall mademoiselle de la valliere be informed of your 
intention to see her it seems she is already aware of that replied the king no 
no saint-aignan he continued after a moments pause we will both of us pass our 
time in dreaming when mademoiselle de la valliere shall have sufficiently 
regretted what she now regrets she will deign perhaps to give us some news of 
herself ah sire is it possible you can so misunderstand that devoted heart the 
king rose flushed with vexation he was a prey to jealousy in its turn de 
saint-aignan was just beginning to feel that his position was becoming awkward 
when the curtain before the door was raised the king turned hastily round his 
first idea was that a letter from louise had arrived but instead of a letter of 
love he saw only his captain of musketeers standing upright and silent in the 
doorway m dartagnan he said ah well monsieur dartagnan looked at de 
saint-aignan louiss eyes took the same direction as those of his captain these 
looks would have been clear to any one and they were especially so to de 
saint-aignan the courtier bowed and quitted the room leaving the king and 
dartagnan alone is it done inquired the king yes sire replied the captain of 
the musketeers in a grave voice it is done the king was unable to say another 
word pride however obliged him not to pause there whenever a sovereign has 
adopted a decisive course even though it be unjust he is compelled to prove to 
all witnesses and particularly to himself that he was quite right in so 
adopting it a good means for effecting that an almost infallible means indeed 
is to try to prove his victim to be in the wrong louis brought up by mazarin 
and anne of austria knew better than any one else his vocation as a monarch he 
therefore endeavored to prove it on the present occasion after a few moments 
pause which he had employed in making silently to himself the same reflections 
which we have just expressed aloud he said in an indifferent tone what did the 
count say nothing at all sire surely he did not allow himself to be arrested 
without saying something he said he expected to be arrested sire the king 
raised his head haughtily i presume he said that m le comte de la fere has not 
continued to play his obstinate and rebellious part in the first place sire 
what do you term rebellious quietly asked the musketeer is that man a rebel in 
the eyes of the king who not only allows himself to be shut up in the bastille 
but who even opposes those who do not wish to take him there who do not wish to 
take him there exclaimed the king what do you say captain are you mad i believe 
not sire you speak of persons who did not wish to arrest m de la fere yes sire 
and who are they those whom your majesty intrusted with that duty apparently 
but it is you whom i intrusted with it exclaimed the king yes sire it is i and 
you say that despite my orders you had the intention of not arresting the man 
who had insulted me yes sire that was really my intention i even proposed to 
the count to mount a horse that i had had prepared for him at the barriere de 
la conference and what was your object in getting this horse ready why sire in 
order that m le comte de la fere might be able to reach havre and from that 
place make his escape to england you betrayed me then monsieur cried the king 
kindling with a wild pride exactly so there was nothing to say in answer to 
statements made in such a tone the king was astounded at such an obstinate and 
open resistance on the part of dartagnan at least you had a reason m dartagnan 
for acting as you did said the king proudly i have always a reason sire your 
reason cannot be your friendship for the count at all events the only one that 
can be of any avail the only one that could possibly excuse you for i placed 
you entirely at your ease in that respect me sire did i not give you the choice 
to arrest or not to arrest m le comte de la fere yes sire but but what 
exclaimed the king impatiently but you warned me sire that if i did not arrest 
him your captain of the guards should do so was i not considerate enough 
towards you when i did not compel you to obey me to me sire you were but not to 
my friend for my friend would be arrested all the same whether by myself or by 
the captain of the guards and this is your devotion monsieur a devotion which 
argues and reasons you are no soldier monsieur i wait for your majesty to tell 
me what i am well then you are a frondeur and since there is no longer any 
fronde sire in that case but if what you say is true what i say is always true 
sire what have you come to say to me monsieur i have come to say to your 
majesty sire m de la fere is in the bastille that is not your fault it would 
seem that is true sire but at all events he is there and since he is there it 
is important that your majesty should know it ah m dartagnan so you set your 
king at defiance sire m dartagnan i warn you that you are abusing my patience 
on the contrary sire what do you mean by on the contrary i have come to get 
myself arrested too to get yourself arrested you of course my friend will be 
lonely down there and i have come to propose to your majesty to permit me to 
bear him company if your majesty will but give the word i will arrest myself i 
shall not need the captain of the guards for that i assure you the king darted 
towards the table and seized a pen to write the order for dartagnans 
imprisonment pay attention monsieur that this is forever cried the king in a 
tone of stern menace i can quite believe that returned the musketeer for when 
you have once done such an act as that you will never be able to look me in the 
face again the king dashed down his pen violently leave the room monsieur he 
said oh not so sire if it please your majesty how not so sire i came to speak 
temperately to your majesty your majesty got into a passion with me that is a 
misfortune but i shall not the less on that account say what i had to say to 
you your resignation monsieur your resignation cried the king sire you know 
whether i care about my resignation or not since at blois on the day when you 
refused king charles the million which my friend the comte de la fere gave him 
i tendered my resignation to your majesty very well then do it at once no sire 
for there is no question of my resignation at the present moment your majesty 
took up your pen just now to send me to the bastille why should you change your 
intention dartagnan gascon that you are who is the king allow me to ask you or 
myself you sire unfortunately what do you mean by unfortunately yes sire for if 
it were i if it were you you would approve of m dartagnans rebellious conduct i 
suppose certainly really said the king shrugging his shoulders and i should 
tell my captain of the musketeers continued dartagnan i should tell him looking 
at him all the while with human eyes and not with eyes like coals of fire m 
dartagnan i have forgotten that i am king i have descended from my throne to 
insult a gentleman monsieur cried the king do you think you can excuse your 
friend by exceeding him in insolence oh sire i shall go much further than he 
did said dartagnan and it will be your own fault i shall tell you what he a man 
full of delicacy did not tell you i shall say sire you sacrificed his son and 
he defended his son you sacrificed him he addressed you in the name of honor of 
religion of virtue you repulsed pursued imprisoned him i shall be harder than 
he was for i shall say to you sire choose do you wish to have friends or 
lackeys soldiers or slaves great men or puppets do you wish men to serve you or 
to crouch before you do you wish men to love you or to fear you if you prefer 
baseness intrigue cowardice oh say it sire we will leave you we who are the 
only surviving illustrations nay i will say more the only models of the valor 
of former times we who have done our duty and have exceeded perhaps in courage 
and in merit the men already great for posterity choose sire and without delay 
whatever remains to you of the grand nobility guard it with a jealous eye of 
courtiers you will always have enough delay not and send me to the bastille 
with my friend for if you have not known how to listen to the comte de la fere 
that is to say to the most sweet and noble voice of honor if you do not know 
how to listen to dartagnan that is to say to the most candid and rough voice of 
sincerity you are a bad king and to-morrow will be a poor king now bad kings 
are hated poor kings are driven away that is what i had to say to you sire you 
are wrong to have driven me to it the king threw himself back in his chair cold 
and livid had a thunderbolt fallen at his feet he could not have been more 
astonished he appeared as if his respiration had ceased and as if he were at 
the point of death that rough voice of sincerity as dartagnan had called it had 
pierced through his heart like a sword-blade dartagnan had said all that he had 
to say comprehending the kings anger he drew his sword and approaching louis 
xiv respectfully placed it on the table but the king with a furious gesture 
thrust aside the sword which fell on the ground and rolled to dartagnans feet 
notwithstanding his mastery over himself dartagnan too in his turn became pale 
and trembled with indignation a king he said may disgrace a soldier he may 
exile him and may even condemn him to death but were he a hundred times a king 
he has no right to insult him by casting dishonor on his sword sire a king of 
france has never repulsed with contempt the sword of a man such as i am stained 
with disgrace as this sword now is it has henceforth no other sheath than 
either your heart or my own i choose my own sire give thanks for it to god and 
my patience then snatching up his sword he cried my blood be upon your head and 
with a rapid gesture he placed the hilt upon the floor and directed the point 
of the blade towards his breast the king however with a movement still more 
rapid than that of dartagnan threw his right arm round the musketeers neck and 
with his left hand seized hold of the blade by the middle and returned it 
silently to the scabbard dartagnan upright pale and still trembling suffered 
the king to do all without aiding him to the very end then louis overcome 
returned to the table took a pen wrote a few lines signed them and offered the 
paper to dartagnan what is this paper sire inquired the captain an order for m 
dartagnan to set the comte de la fere at liberty immediately dartagnan seized 
the kings hand and kissed it he then folded the order placed it in his belt and 
quitted the room neither the king nor the captain spoke a word oh human heart 
director of kings murmured louis when alone when shall i learn to read in your 
recesses as in the leaves of a book no i am not a bad king nor am i a poor king 
but i am still a child chaper xxvi political rivals dartagnan had promised m de 
baisemeaux to return in time for dessert and he kept his word they had just 
reached the finer and more delicate class of wines and liqueurs with which the 
governors cellar had the reputation of being most admirably stocked when the 
spurs of the captain resounded in the corridor and he himself appeared at the 
threshold athos and aramis had played a close game neither had been able to 
gain the slightest advantage over the other they had supped talked a good deal 
about the bastille of the last journey to fontainebleau of the intended fete 
that m fouquet was about to give at vaux they had generalized on every possible 
subject and no one excepting baisemeaux had alluded to private matters 
dartagnan arrived in the very midst of the conversation still pale and 
disturbed by his interview with the king baisemeaux hastened to give him a 
chair dartagnan accepted a glass of wine and set it down empty athos and aramis 
both remarked his emotion as for baisemeaux he saw nothing more than the 
captain of the kings musketeers to whom he endeavored to show every attention 
to be near the king entitled any one to all privileges in the eyes of m de 
baisemeaux but although aramis had remarked that emotion he had not been able 
to guess the cause of it athos alone believed that he had detected it to him 
dartagnans return and particularly the manner in which he usually so impassive 
seemed overcome signified i have just asked the king something which he has 
refused me thoroughly convinced that his conjecture was correct athos smiled 
rose from the table and made a sign to dartagnan as if to remind him that they 
had something else to do than to sup together dartagnan immediately understood 
him and replied by another sign aramis and baisemeaux watched this silent 
dialogue and looked inquiringly at each other athos felt that he was called 
upon to give an explanation of what was passing the truth is my friends said 
the comte de la fere with a smile that you aramis have been supping with a 
state criminal and you m de baisemeaux with your prisoner baisemeaux uttered an 
exclamation of surprise and almost of delight that worthy man took pride in his 
fortress profit aside the more prisoners he had the happier he was and the 
higher the prisoners were in rank the prouder he felt aramis assumed an 
expression which he thought the situation required and said well dear athos 
forgive me but i almost suspected what has happened some prank of raoul or la 
valliere is it not alas said baisemeaux and continued aramis you a high and 
powerful nobleman as you are forgetful that there are now only courtiers you 
have been to the king and told him what you thought of his conduct yes you have 
guessed right so that said baisemeaux trembling at having supped so familiarly 
with a man who had fallen into disgrace with the king so that monsieur the 
count so that my dear governor said athos my friend dartagnan will communicate 
to you the contents of the paper which i perceive just peeping out of his belt 
and which assuredly can be nothing else than the order for my incarceration 
baisemeaux held out his hand with his accustomed eagerness dartagnan drew two 
papers from his belt and presented one of them to the governor who unfolded it 
and then read in a low tone of voice looking at athos over the paper as he did 
so and pausing from time to time order to detain in my chateau of the bastille 
m le comte de la fere oh monsieur this is indeed a very melancholy honor for me 
you will have a patient prisoner monsieur said athos in his calm soft voice a 
prisoner too who will not remain a month with you my dear governor said aramis 
while baisemeaux still holding the order in his hand transcribed it upon the 
prison registry not a day or rather not even a night said dartagnan displaying 
the second order of the king for now dear m de baisemeaux you will have the 
goodness to transcribe also this order for setting the count immediately at 
liberty ah said aramis it is a labor that you have spared me dartagnan and he 
pressed the musketeers hand in a significant manner and that of athos at the 
same time what said the latter in astonishment the king sets me at liberty read 
my dear friend returned dartagnan athos took the order and read it it is quite 
true he said are you sorry for it asked dartagnan oh no on the contrary i wish 
the king no harm and the greatest evil or misfortune that any one can wish 
kings is that they should commit an act of injustice but you have had a 
difficult and painful task i know tell me have you not dartagnan i not at all 
said the musketeer laughing the king does everything i wish him to do aramis 
looked fixedly at dartagnan and saw that he was not speaking the truth but 
baisemeaux had eyes for nothing but dartagnan so great was his admiration for a 
man who could make the king do all he wished and does the king exile athos 
inquired aramis no not precisely the king did not explain himself upon that 
subject replied dartagnan but i think the count could not do better unless 
indeed he wishes particularly to thank the king no indeed replied athos smiling 
well then i think resumed dartagnan that the count cannot do better than to 
retire to his own chateau however my dear athos you have only to speak to tell 
me what you want if any particular place of residence is more agreeable to you 
than another i can obtain it for you no thank you said athos nothing can be 
more agreeable to me my dear friend than to return to the solitude beneath my 
noble trees on the banks of the loire if heaven be the overruling physician of 
the evils of the mind nature is a sovereign remedy and so monsieur continued 
athos turning again towards baisemeaux i am now free i suppose yes monsieur the 
count i think so at least i hope so said the governor turning over and over the 
two papers in question unless however m dartagnan has a third order to give me 
no my dear m baisemeaux no said the musketeer the second is quite enough we can 
stop there ah monsieur the count said baisemeaux addressing athos you do not 
know what you are losing i should have placed you at thirty livres like the 
generals what am i saying i mean at fifty livres like the princes and you would 
have supped every evening as you have supped to-night allow me monsieur said 
athos to prefer my mediocrity and then turning to dartagnan he said let us go 
my friend let us go said dartagnan shall i have the happiness of having you as 
my companion to the city gate only replied dartagnan after which i will tell 
you what i told the king i am on duty and you dear aramis said athos smiling 
will you accompany me la fere is on the road to vannes thank you my dear friend 
said aramis but i have an appointment in paris this evening and i cannot leave 
without very serious interests suffering by my absence in that case said athos 
i must say adieu and take my leave of you my dear m de baisemeaux i have to 
thank you exceedingly for your good will and particularly for the specimen you 
have given me of the bastille fare and having embraced aramis and shaken hands 
with m de baisemeaux and having received their wishes for an agreeable journey 
from them both athos set off with dartagnan while the denouement of the scene 
of the palais-royal was taking place at the bastille let us relate what was 
going on at the lodgings of athos and of bragelonne grimaud as we have seen had 
accompanied his master to paris and as we have said he was present when athos 
went out he had seen dartagnan gnaw the corners of his mustache he had seen his 
master get into the carriage he had narrowly examined both their countenances 
and he had known them both for a sufficiently long period to read and 
understand through the mask of their impassiveness that serious events were 
taking place as soon as athos had gone he began to reflect then he remembered 
the strange manner in which athos had taken leave of him the embarrassment 
imperceptible to any one but himself of his master that man of clear ideas and 
straightforward will he knew that athos had taken nothing with him but the 
clothes he had on him at the time and yet he thought he saw that athos had not 
left for an hour merely or even for a day a long absence was signified by the 
manner in which he pronounced the word adieu all these circumstances recurred 
to his mind with all his feelings of deep affection for athos with that horror 
of emptiness and solitude which invariably besets the minds of those who love 
and all these combined rendered poor grimaud very melancholy and particularly 
very apprehensive without being able to account to himself for what he did 
after his masters departure he wandered about the apartment seeking as it were 
for some traces of him like a faithful dog who is not exactly uneasy about his 
absent master but at least is restless only as to the instinct of the animal 
grimaud joined the reason of a man he had at the same time restlessness and 
anxiety not having found any indication which could serve as a guide and having 
neither seen nor discovered anything which could satisfy his doubts grimaud 
began to imagine what could have happened now the imagination is the resource 
or rather the punishment of good and affectionate hearts in fact never does a 
good heart represent its absent friend to itself as being happy or cheerful 
never does the pigeon who travels inspire anything but terror to the pigeon who 
remains at home grimaud soon passed from anxiety to terror he carefully went 
over in his own mind everything that had taken place dartagnans letter to athos 
the letter which had seemed to distress athos so much then raouls coming to 
athos upon which athos had asked for his orders and his court dress then his 
interview with the king at the end of which athos had returned home so gloomy 
then the explanation between the father and the son at the termination of which 
athos had embraced raoul with such sadness of expression while raoul himself 
went away sorrowfully and finally dartagnans arrival biting his mustache and 
his leaving again in the carriage accompanied by the comte de la fere all this 
composed a drama in five acts very plain especially so to an analyst as skilful 
as grimaud in the first place grimaud resorted to grand measures he searched in 
his masters coat for m dartagnans letter he found the letter still there and 
this is what it contained my dear friend raoul has been to ask me for some 
particulars about the conduct of mademoiselle de la valliere during our young 
friends residence in london i am a poor captain of musketeers whose ears are 
battered every day by the scandal of the barracks and the bedchamber if i had 
told raoul all i believe i know the poor fellow would have died from it but i 
am in the kings service and cannot speak of the kings affairs if your heart 
tells you to do it set off at once the matter concerns you more than myself and 
almost as much as raoul grimaud tore not a handful but a finger-and-thumbful of 
hair out of his head he would have torn out more if his hair had been more 
abundant yes he said that is the key of the whole enigma the young girl has 
been playing her pranks what people say about her and the king is true then our 
young master has been deceived he ought to know it monsieur the count has been 
to see the king and has given him a piece of his mind and then the king sent m 
dartagnan to arrange the affair ah my god continued grimaud monsieur the count 
i now remember returned without his sword this discovery made the perspiration 
break out all over poor grimauds face he did not waste any more time in useless 
conjecture but clapped his hat on his head and started for raouls lodgings 
raoul after louise had left him had mastered his grief if not his affection and 
compelled to look forward on that perilous road on which madness and rebellion 
were hurrying him he had seen from the very first glance his father exposed to 
the royal obstinacy since athos had immediately exposed himself to that 
obstinacy in this moment when sympathy gave him insight the unhappy young man 
recalled the mysterious signs which athos had made and the unexpected visit of 
dartagnan the probable result of the conflict between a sovereign and a subject 
revealed itself to his terrified vision as dartagnan was on duty that is fixed 
to his post he certainly had not come to pay athos a visit merely for the 
pleasure of seeing him he must have come to say something to him this something 
in a crisis so serious was either a misfortune or a danger raoul shuddered at 
his selfishness in having forgotten his father for his love in having occupied 
himself with dreams or the fascinations of despair at a time when it was 
perhaps necessary to repel an imminent attack directed against athos the idea 
nearly drove him wild he buckled on his sword and ran towards his fathers 
lodgings on his way thither he encountered grimaud who having set off from the 
opposite direction was running with equal eagerness in search of the truth the 
two men embraced each other warmly they were both at the same point of the 
parabola described by their imagination grimaud exclaimed raoul m raoul cried 
grimaud is the count well have you seen him no where is he i am trying to find 
out and m dartagnan went out with him when ten minutes after you had left in 
what way did they go out in a carriage where did they go i have no idea at all 
did my father take any money with him no or his sword no grimaud m raoul i have 
an idea that m dartagnan came to arrest monsieur the count do you not think 
monsieur yes grimaud i could have sworn it what road did they take the way 
leading towards the quays to the bastille then ah my god yes quick quick let us 
run yes let us run but whither said raoul overwhelmed we will go to m 
dartagnans first we may perhaps learn something there no if he has kept it from 
me at my fathers he will do the same everywhere let us go to oh good heavens 
why i must be mad to-day grimaud why so i have forgotten m du vallon m porthos 
who is waiting for and expecting me still alas i have told you correctly i am 
mad where is he then at the minimes of vincennes thank goodness that is in the 
direction of the bastille i will run and saddle the horses and we will go at 
once said grimaud do my friend do chapter xxvii in which porthos is convinced 
without having understood anything the worthy porthos faithful to all the laws 
of ancient chivalry had determined to wait for m de saint-aignan until sunset 
and as de saint-aignan did not come as raoul had forgotten to communicate with 
his second and as he found that waiting so long was very wearisome porthos had 
desired one of the gate-keepers to fetch him a few bottles of good wine and a 
good joint of meat so that he at least might have the diversion of enjoying 
from time to time a glass of wine and a mouthful of something to eat he had 
just finished when raoul arrived escorted by grimaud both of them riding at 
full speed when porthos saw the two cavaliers riding at such a pace along the 
road he did not for a moment doubt but that they were the men he was expecting 
and he rose from the grass upon which he had been indolently reclining and 
began to stretch his legs and arms saying see what it is to have good habits 
the fellow has come after all if i had gone away he would have found no one 
here and would have taken an advantage from that he then threw himself into a 
martial attitude and drew himself up to the full height of his gigantic stature 
but instead of de saint-aignan he saw only raoul who with the most despairing 
gestures accosted him by crying out pray forgive me my dear friend i am most 
wretched raoul cried porthos surprised you have been angry with me said raoul 
embracing porthos i what for for having forgotten you but you see i have lost 
my head ah bah if you only knew my friend you have killed him whom de 
saint-aignan alas we are far from de saint-aignan what is the matter then the 
matter is that m le comte de la fere has been arrested porthos gave a start 
that would have thrown down a wall arrested he cried out by whom by dartagnan 
it is impossible said porthos it is nevertheless true replied raoul porthos 
turned towards grimaud as if he needed a second confirmation of the 
intelligence grimaud nodded his head and where have they taken him probably to 
the bastille what makes you think that as we came along we questioned some 
persons who saw the carriage pass and others who saw it enter the bastille oh 
oh muttered porthos and he moved forward two steps what do you intend to do 
inquired raoul i nothing only i will not have athos remain at the bastille do 
you know said raoul advancing nearer to porthos that the arrest was made by 
order of the king porthos looked at the young man as if to say what does that 
matter to me this dumb language seemed so eloquent of meaning to raoul that he 
did not ask another question he mounted his horse again and porthos assisted by 
grimaud did the same let us arrange our plan of action said raoul yes returned 
porthos that is the best thing we can do raoul sighed deeply and then paused 
suddenly what is the matter asked porthos are you faint no powerless can we 
three pretend to go and take the bastille well if dartagnan were only here 
replied porthos i dont know about that raoul was struck with admiration at the 
sight of that confidence heroic in its simplicity these were the celebrated men 
who by three or four attacked armies and assaulted castles who had terrified 
death itself and who survived the wrecks of an age and were still stronger than 
the most robust among the young monsieur said he to porthos you have just given 
me an idea we absolutely must see m dartagnan undoubtedly he ought by this time 
to have returned home after having taken my father to the bastille let us go to 
his house first inquire at the bastille said grimaud who was in the habit of 
speaking little but to the purpose accordingly they hastened towards the 
fortress when one of those chances which heaven bestows on men of strong will 
caused grimaud suddenly to perceive the carriage which was entering by the 
great gate of the drawbridge this was at the moment when dartagnan was as we 
have seen returning from his visit to the king in vain raoul urged on his horse 
to overtake the carriage and see whom it contained the horses had already 
gained the other side of the great gate which again closed while one of the 
sentries struck the nose of raouls horse with his musket raoul turned about 
only too happy to find that he had ascertained something respecting the 
carriage which had contained his father we have him said grimaud if we wait a 
little it is certain that he will leave dont you think so my friend unless 
indeed dartagnan also be a prisoner replied porthos in which case everything is 
lost raoul returned no answer for any hypothesis was admissible he instructed 
grimaud to lead the horses to the little rue jean-beausire so as to give rise 
to less suspicion and himself with his piercing gaze watched for the exit 
either of dartagnan or the carriage it was a fortunate plan for twenty minutes 
had not elapsed before the gate reopened and the carriage reappeared a dazzling 
of the eyes prevented raoul from distinguishing what figures occupied the 
interior grimaud averred that he had seen two persons and that one of them was 
his master porthos kept looking at raoul and grimaud by turns in the hope of 
understanding their idea it is clear said grimaud that if the count is in the 
carriage either he is set at liberty or they are taking him to another prison 
we shall soon see that by the road he takes answered porthos if he is set at 
liberty said grimaud they will conduct him home true rejoined porthos the 
carriage does not take that way cried raoul and indeed the horses were just 
disappearing down the faubourg st antoine let us hasten said porthos we will 
attack the carriage on the road and tell athos to flee rebellion murmured raoul 
porthos darted a second glance at raoul quite worthy of the first raoul replied 
only by spurring the flanks of his steed in a few moments the three cavaliers 
had overtaken the carriage and followed it so closely that their horses breath 
moistened the back of it dartagnan whose senses were ever on the alert heard 
the trot of the horses at the moment when raoul was telling porthos to pass the 
chariot so as to see who was the person accompanying athos porthos complied but 
could not see anything for the blinds were lowered rage and impatience were 
gaining mastery over raoul he had just noticed the mystery preserved by athoss 
companion and determined on proceeding to extremities on his part dartagnan had 
clearly recognized porthos and raoul also from under the blinds and had 
communicated to the count the result of his observation they were desirous only 
of seeing whether raoul and porthos would push the affair to the uttermost and 
this they speedily did raoul presenting his pistol threw himself on the leader 
commanding the coachman to stop porthos seized the coachman and dragged him 
from his seat grimaud already had hold of the carriage door raoul threw open 
his arms exclaiming monsieur the count monsieur the count ah is it you raoul 
said athos intoxicated with joy not bad indeed added dartagnan with a burst of 
laughter and they both embraced the young man and porthos who had captured them 
my brave porthos best of friends cried athos it is still the same with you he 
is still only twenty said dartagnan bravo porthos confound it answered porthos 
slightly confused we thought that you were arrested while rejoined athos i was 
in fact only taking a drive in m dartagnans carriage but we followed you from 
the bastille returned raoul with a tone of suspicion and reproach where we had 
been to take supper with our good friend m baisemeaux you recollect baisemeaux 
porthos very well indeed and there we saw aramis in the bastille at supper ah 
said porthos again breathing freely he gave us a thousand messages for you 
thanks and where is monsieur the count going asked grimaud already recompensed 
by a smile from his master we are going home to blois how is that at once yes 
right forward without any luggage oh raoul would have been instructed to 
forward me mine or to bring it with him on his return if he returns if nothing 
detains him longer in paris said dartagnan with a glance firm and cutting as 
steel and as painful for it reopened the poor young fellows wounds he will do 
well to follow you athos there is nothing to keep me any longer in paris said 
raoul then we will go immediately replied athos and m dartagnan oh as for me i 
was only accompanying athos as far as the barrier and i return with porthos 
very good said the latter come my son added the count gently passing his arm 
round raouls neck to draw him into the carriage and again embracing him grimaud 
continued the count you will return quietly to paris with your horse and m du 
vallons for raoul and i will mount here and give up the carriage to these two 
gentlemen to return to paris in and then as soon as you arrive you will take my 
clothes and letters and forward the whole to me at home but observed raoul who 
was anxious to make the count converse when you return to paris there will not 
be a single thing there for you which will be very inconvenient i think it will 
be a very long time raoul ere i return to paris the last sojourn we have made 
there has not been of a nature to encourage me to repeat it raoul hung his head 
and said not a word more athos descended from the carriage and mounted the 
horse which had brought porthos and which seemed no little pleased at the 
exchange then they embraced clasped one anothers hands and interchanged a 
thousand pledges of eternal friendship porthos promised to spend a month with 
athos at the first opportunity dartagnan engaged to take advantage of his first 
leave of absence and then having embraced raoul for the last time to you my boy 
said he i will write coming from dartagnan who he knew wrote but very seldom 
these words expressed everything raoul was moved even to tears he tore himself 
away from the musketeer and departed dartagnan rejoined porthos in the carriage 
well said he my dear friend what a day we have had indeed yes answered porthos 
you must be quite worn out not quite however i shall retire early to rest so as 
to be ready tomorrow and wherefore why to complete what i have begun you make 
me shudder my friend you seem to me quite angry what the devil have you begun 
which is not finished listen raoul has not fought it is necessary that i should 
fight with whom with the king how exclaimed porthos astounded with the king yes 
i say you great baby with the king i assure you it is with m de saint-aignan 
look now this is what i mean you draw your sword against the king in fighting 
with this gentleman ah said porthos staring are you sure of it indeed i am how 
shall we arrange it then we must try and make a good supper porthos the captain 
of the musketeers keeps a tolerable table there you will see the handsome de 
saint-aignan and will drink his health i cried porthos horrified what said 
dartagnan you refuse to drink the kings health but body alive i am not talking 
to you about the king at all i am speaking of m de saint-aignan but since i 
repeat that it is the same thing ah well well said porthos overcome you 
understand dont you no said porthos but no matter yes it is all the same 
replied dartagnan let us go to supper porthos chapter xxviii m de baisemeauxs 
society the reader has not forgotten that on quitting the bastille dartagnan 
and the comte de la fere had left aramis in close confabulation with baisemeaux 
when once these two guests had departed baisemeaux did not in the least 
perceive that the conversation suffered by their absence he thought that wine 
after supper and that of the bastille in particular was excellent and that it 
was a stimulant quite sufficient to make an honest man talk but he little knew 
his greatness who was never more impenetrable than at dessert his greatness 
however perfectly understood m de baisemeaux when he reckoned on making the 
governor discourse by the means which the latter regarded as efficacious the 
conversation therefore without flagging in appearance flagged in reality for 
baisemeaux not only had it nearly all to himself but further kept speaking only 
of that singular event the incarceration of athos followed by so prompt an 
order to set him again at liberty nor moreover had baisemeaux failed to observe 
that the order of arrest and that of liberation were both in the kings hand but 
the king would not take the trouble to write such orders except under pressing 
circumstances all this was very interesting and above all very puzzling to 
baisemeaux but as on the other hand all this was very clear to aramis the 
latter did not attach to the occurrence the same importance as did the worthy 
governor besides aramis rarely put himself out of the way for anything and he 
had not yet told m de baisemeaux for what reason he had now done so and so at 
the very climax of baisemeauxs dissertation aramis suddenly interrupted him 
tell me my dear m baisemeaux said he have you never had any other diversions at 
the bastille than those at which i have assisted during the two or three visits 
i have had the honor to pay you this address was so unexpected that the 
governor like a vane which suddenly receives an impulsion opposed to that of 
the wind was quite dumfounded at it diversions said he but i take them 
continually monseigneur oh to be sure and these diversions are of every kind 
visits no doubt no not visits visits are not frequent at the bastille what are 
visits rare then very rare even on the part of your society what do you mean by 
my society the prisoners oh no your prisoners indeed i know well it is you who 
visit them and not they you by your society i mean my dear m baisemeaux the 
society of which you are a member baisemeaux looked fixedly at aramis and then 
as if the idea which had flashed across his mind were impossible oh he said i 
have very little society at present if i must own it to you my dear m dherblay 
the fact is to stay at the bastille appears for the most part distressing and 
distasteful to persons of the gay world as for the ladies it is never without a 
dread which costs me infinite trouble to allay that they come to my quarters 
and indeed how should they avoid trembling a little poor things when they see 
those gloomy dungeons and reflect that they are inhabited by prisoners who in 
proportion as the eyes of baisemeaux concentrated their gaze on the face of 
aramis the worthy governors tongue faltered more and more until finally it 
stopped altogether no you dont understand me my dear m baisemeaux you dont 
understand me i do not at all mean to speak of society in general but of a 
particular society of the society in a word to which you are affiliated 
baisemeaux nearly dropped the glass of muscat which he was in the act of 
raising to his lips affiliated cried he affiliated yes affiliated undoubtedly 
repeated aramis with the greatest self-possession are you not a member of a 
secret society my dear m baisemeaux secret secret or mysterious oh m dherblay 
see you dont deny it but believe me i believe what i know i swear to you listen 
to me my dear m baisemeaux i say yes you say no one of us two necessarily says 
what is true and the other it inevitably follows what is false well and then 
well we shall come to an understanding presently let us see said baisemeaux let 
us see now drink your glass of muscat dear m baisemeaux said aramis what the 
devil you look quite scared no no not the least in the world no drink then 
baisemeaux drank but he swallowed the wrong way well resumed aramis if i say 
you are not a member of a society secret or mysterious whichever you like to 
call it the epithet is of no consequence if i say you are not a member of a 
society similar to that i wish to designate well then you will not understand a 
word of what i am going to say that is all oh be sure beforehand that i shall 
not understand anything well well try now let us see that is what i am going to 
do if on the contrary you are one of the members of this society you will 
immediately answer me yes or no begin your questions then continued baisemeaux 
trembling you will agree dear m de baisemeaux continued aramis with the same 
impassiveness that it is evident a man cannot be a member of a society it is 
evident that he cannot enjoy the advantages it offers to the affiliated without 
being himself bound to certain little services in short stammered baisemeaux 
that would be intelligible if well resumed aramis there is in the society of 
which i speak and of which as it seems you are not a member allow me said 
baisemeaux i should not like to say absolutely there is an engagement entered 
into by all the governors and captains of fortresses affiliated to the order 
baisemeaux grew pale now the engagement continued aramis firmly is of this 
nature baisemeaux rose manifesting unspeakable emotion go on dear m dherblay go 
on said he aramis then spoke or rather recited the following sentence in the 
same tone as if he had been reading it from a book the aforesaid captain or 
governor of a fortress shall allow to enter when need shall arise and on demand 
of the prisoner a confessor affiliated to the order he stopped baisemeaux was 
quite distressing to look at being so wretchedly pale and trembling is not that 
the text of the agreement quietly asked aramis monseigneur began baisemeaux ah 
well you begin to understand i think monseigneur cried baisemeaux do not trifle 
so with my unhappy mind i find myself nothing in your hands if you have the 
malignant desire to draw from me the little secrets of my administration oh by 
no means pray undeceive yourself dear m baisemeaux it is not the little secrets 
of your administration that i aim at but those of your conscience well then my 
conscience be it my dear m dherblay but have some consideration for the 
situation i am in which is no ordinary one it is no ordinary one my dear 
monsieur continued the inflexible aramis if you are a member of this society 
but it is quite a natural one if free from all engagements you are answerable 
only to the king well monsieur well i obey only the king good god whom else 
would you have a french gentleman obey aramis did not yield an inch but with 
that silvery voice of his continued it is very pleasant for a french gentleman 
for a prelate of france to hear a man of your mark express himself so loyally 
dear de baisemeaux and having heard you to believe no more than you do have you 
doubted monsieur i oh no and so you doubt no longer i have no longer any doubt 
that such a man as you monsieur said aramis gravely does not faithfully serve 
the masters whom he voluntarily chose for himself masters cried baisemeaux yes 
masters i said m dherblay you are still jesting are you not oh yes i understand 
that it is a more difficult position to have several masters than one but the 
embarrassment is owing to you my dear baisemeaux and i am not the cause of it 
certainly not returned the unfortunate governor more embarrassed than ever but 
what are you doing you are leaving the table assuredly are you going yes i am 
going but you are behaving very strangely towards me monseigneur i am behaving 
strangely in what respect have you sworn then to put me to the torture no i 
should be sorry to do so remain then i cannot and why because i have no longer 
anything to do here and indeed i have duties to fulfil elsewhere duties so late 
as this yes understand me now my dear m de baisemeaux they told me at the place 
whence i came the aforesaid governor or captain will allow to enter as need 
shall arise on the prisoners demand a confessor affiliated with the order i 
came you do not know what i mean and so i shall return to tell them that they 
are mistaken and that they must send me elsewhere what you are cried baisemeaux 
looking at aramis almost in terror the confessor affiliated to the order said 
aramis without changing his voice but gentle as the words were they had the 
same effect on the unhappy governor as a clap of thunder baisemeaux became 
livid and it seemed to him as if aramiss beaming eyes were two forks of flame 
piercing to the very bottom of his soul the confessor murmured he you 
monseigneur the confessor of the order yes i but we have nothing to unravel 
together seeing that you are not one of the affiliated monseigneur and i 
understand that not being so you refuse to comply with its commands monseigneur 
i beseech you condescend to hear me and wherefore monseigneur i do not say that 
i have nothing to do with the society ah ah i say not that i refuse to obey 
nevertheless m de baisemeaux what has passed wears very much the air of 
resistance oh no monseigneur no i only wished to be certain to be certain of 
what said aramis in a tone of supreme contempt of nothing at all monseigneur 
baisemeaux lowered his voice and bending before the prelate said i am at all 
times and in all places at the disposal of my masters but very good i like you 
better thus monsieur said aramis as he resumed his seat and put out his glass 
to baisemeaux whose hand trembled so that he could not fill it you were saying 
but continued aramis but replied the unhappy man having no notice i was far 
from expecting does not the gospel say watch for the moment is known only of 
god do not the rules of the order say watch for that which i will you ought 
always to will also and on what pretext is it that you did not expect the 
confessor m de baisemeaux because monseigneur there is at present in the 
bastille no prisoner ill aramis shrugged his shoulder what do you know about 
that said he but nevertheless it appears to me m de baisemeaux said aramis 
turning round in his chair here is your servant who wishes to speak with you 
and at this moment baisemeauxs servant appeared at the threshold of the door 
what is it asked baisemeaux sharply monsieur said the man they are bringing you 
the doctors return aramis looked at baisemeaux with a calm and confident eye 
well said baisemeaux let the messenger enter the messenger entered saluted and 
handed in the report baisemeaux ran his eye over it and raising his head said 
in surprise no bertaudiere is ill how was it then said aramis carelessly that 
you told me everybody was well in your hotel m de baisemeaux and he emptied his 
glass without removing his eyes from baisemeaux the governor then made a sign 
to the messenger and when he had quitted the room said still trembling i think 
that there is in the article on the prisoners demand yes it is so answered 
aramis but see what it is they want with you now dear m de baisemeaux at that 
moment a sergeant put his head in at the door what do you want now cried 
baisemeaux can you not leave me in peace for ten minutes monsieur said the 
sergeant the sick man no bertaudiere has commissioned the turnkey to request 
you to send him a confessor baisemeaux very nearly sank on the floor but aramis 
disdained to reassure him just as he had disdained to terrify him what must i 
answer inquired baisemeaux just what you please replied aramis compressing his 
lips that is your business i am not governor of the bastille tell the prisoner 
cried baisemeaux quickly tell the prisoner that his request is granted the 
sergeant left the room oh monseigneur monseigneur murmured baisemeaux how could 
i have suspected how could i have foreseen this who told you to suspect and who 
asked you to foresee contemptuously answered aramis the order suspects the 
order knows the order foresees is not that enough what do you command added 
baisemeaux i nothing at all i am nothing but a poor priest a simple confessor 
have i your orders to go and see the sufferer oh monseigneur i do not order i 
pray you to go tis well then conduct me to him chapter xxix the prisoner since 
aramiss singular transformation into a confessor of the order baisemeaux was no 
longer the same man up to that period the place which aramis had held in the 
worthy governors estimation was that of a prelate whom he respected and a 
friend to whom he owed a debt of gratitude but after that revelation which had 
upset all his ideas he felt himself an inferior and that aramis was his master 
he himself lighted a lantern summoned a turnkey and said returning to aramis i 
am at your orders monseigneur aramis merely nodded his head as much as to say 
very good and signed to him with his hand to lead the way baisemeaux advanced 
and aramis followed him it was a beautiful starry night the steps of the three 
men resounded on the flags of the terraces and the clinking of the keys hanging 
from the jailers girdle made itself heard up to the stories of the towers as if 
to remind the prisoners that liberty was out of their reach it might have been 
said that the alteration effected in baisemeaux had extended itself even to the 
prisoners the turnkey the same who on aramiss first arrival had shown himself 
so inquisitive and curious had now become not only silent but even impassible 
he held his head down and seemed afraid to keep his ears open in this wise they 
reached the basement of the bertaudiere the first two stories of which were 
mounted silently and somewhat slowly for baisemeaux though far from disobeying 
was far from exhibiting any eagerness to obey finally they arrived at the door 
the jailer had the key ready and opened the door baisemeaux showed a 
disposition to enter the prisoners chamber but aramis stopping him on the 
threshold said the rules do not allow the governor to hear the prisoners 
confession baisemeaux bowed and made way for aramis who took the lantern and 
entered and then signed to them to close the door behind him for an instant he 
remained standing listening to learn whether baisemeaux and the turnkey had 
retired but as soon as he was assured by the dying sound of their footsteps 
that they had left the tower he put the lantern on the table and gazed around 
on a bed of green serge similar in all respects to the other beds in the 
bastille save that it was newer under ample curtains half drawn reposed a young 
man to whom we have once before introduced aramis according to custom the 
prisoner was without a light at the hour of curfew he was bound to extinguish 
his lamp it may be seen how much he was favored in being allowed to keep it 
burning until that hour near the bed a large leathern arm-chair with twisted 
legs held his clothes a little table without pens books paper or ink stood 
deserted near the window while several plates still unemptied showed that the 
prisoner had scarcely touched his recent repast aramis saw that the young man 
was stretched upon his bed his face half concealed by his arms the arrival of a 
visitor did not cause any change of position either he was waiting in 
expectation or he was asleep aramis lighted the candle from the lantern pushed 
back the arm-chair and approached the bed with an appearance of mingled 
interest and respect the young man raised his head what is it said he have you 
not desired a confessor replied aramis yes because you are ill yes very ill the 
young man gave aramis a piercing glance and answered i thank you after a 
moments silence i have seen you before he continued aramis bowed doubtless the 
scrutiny which the prisoner had just made of the cold crafty and imperious 
character stamped upon the features of the bishop of vannes was little 
reassuring to one in his situation for he added i am better and then said 
aramis why then being better i have no longer the same need of a confessor i 
think not even of the haircloth of which the note you found in your bread 
informed you the young man started but before he had either assented or denied 
aramis continued not even of the ecclesiastic from whom you were to hear an 
important revelation if it be so said the young man sinking again on his pillow 
it is different i listen aramis then looked at him more closely and was struck 
with the easy majesty of his mien one which can never be acquired unless heaven 
has implanted it in the blood or in the heart sit down monsieur said the 
prisoner aramis bowed and obeyed how does the bastille agree with you asked the 
bishop very well you do not suffer no you have nothing to regret nothing not 
even your liberty what do you call liberty monsieur asked the prisoner with the 
tone of a man who is preparing for a struggle i call liberty the flowers the 
air light the stars the happiness of going whithersoever the nervous limbs of 
twenty years of age may wish to carry you the young man smiled whether in 
resignation or contempt it would have been difficult to tell look said he i 
have in that japanese vase two roses gathered yesterday evening in the bud from 
the governors garden this morning they have blown and spread their vermilion 
chalices beneath my gaze with every opening petal they unfold the treasures of 
their perfume filling my chamber with fragrance look now on these two roses 
even among roses these are beautiful and the rose is the most beautiful of 
flowers why then do you bid me desire other flowers when i possess the 
loveliest of all aramis gazed at the young man in surprise if flowers 
constitute liberty sadly resumed the captive i am free for i possess them but 
the air cried aramis air so necessary to life well monsieur returned the 
prisoner draw near to the window it is open between heaven and earth the wind 
whirls its storms of hail and lightning wafts its warm mists or breathes in 
gentle breezes it caresses my face when mounted on the back of this arm-chair 
with my arm around the bars of the window to sustain myself i fancy i am 
swimming in the wide expanse the countenance of aramis darkened as the young 
man spoke light continued the prisoner i have what is better than light i have 
the sun a friend who comes to visit me every day without the permission of the 
governor or the jailers company he comes in at the window and traces in my room 
a quadrilateral which starts from the window and reaches to the hangings of my 
bed this luminous figure increases from ten oclock till midday and decreases 
from one till three slowly as if having hastened to come it sorrowed at leaving 
me when its last ray disappears i have enjoyed its presence for four hours is 
not that sufficient i have been told that there are unhappy beings who dig in 
quarries and laborers who toil in mines who never behold the sun at all aramis 
wiped the drops from his brow as to the stars which are so delightful to view 
continued the young man they all resemble one another save in size and 
brilliancy i am a favored mortal for if you had not lighted that candle you 
would have been able to see the beautiful star which i was gazing at from my 
couch before your arrival and whose rays were playing over my eyes aramis 
lowered his head he felt himself overwhelmed by the bitter flow of that 
sinister philosophy which is the religion of the captive so much then for the 
flowers the air the daylight and the stars tranquilly continued the young man 
there remains freedom of movement do i not walk all day in the governors garden 
if it is fine here if it rains in the fresh air if it is warm in the warm 
thanks to my fireplace if it be cold ah monsieur do you fancy continued the 
prisoner not without bitterness that men have not done everything for me that a 
man can hope for or desire men said aramis raising his head be it so but it 
seems to me you forget heaven indeed i have forgotten heaven murmured the 
prisoner without emotion but why do you mention it of what use is it to talk to 
a prisoner of heaven aramis looked steadily at this singular youth who 
possessed the resignation of a martyr with the smile of an atheist is not god 
in everything he murmured in a reproachful tone say rather at the end of 
everything answered the prisoner firmly be it so said aramis but let us return 
to our starting-point i desire nothing better returned the young man i am your 
confessor yes well then you ought as a penitent to tell me the truth all that i 
wish is to tell it to you every prisoner has committed some crime for which he 
has been imprisoned what crime then have you committed you asked me the same 
question the first time you saw me returned the prisoner and then as now you 
evaded giving me an answer and what reason have you for thinking that i shall 
now reply to you because this time i am your confessor then if you wish me to 
tell what crime i have committed explain to me in what a crime consists for as 
my conscience does not accuse me i aver that i am not a criminal we are often 
criminals in the sight of the great of the earth not alone for having ourselves 
committed crimes but because we know that crimes have been committed the 
prisoner manifested the deepest attention yes i understand you he said after a 
pause yes you are right monsieur it is very possible that in that light i am a 
criminal in the eyes of the great ah then you know something said aramis who 
thought he had pierced not merely through a defect in the harness but through 
the joints of it no i am not aware of anything replied the young man but 
sometimes i think and i say to myself in those moments what do you say to 
yourself that if i were to think any further i should either go mad or i should 
divine a great deal and then and then said aramis impatiently then i leave off 
you leave off yes my head becomes confused and my ideas melancholy i feel ennui 
overtaking me i wish what i dont know but i do not like to give myself up to 
longing for things which i do not possess when i am so happy with what i have 
you are afraid of death said aramis with a slight uneasiness yes said the young 
man smiling aramis felt the chill of that smile and shuddered oh as you fear 
death you know more than you admit he cried and you returned the prisoner who 
bade me to ask to see you you who when i did ask for you came here promising a 
world of confidence how is it that nevertheless it is you who are silent and t 
is i who speak since then we both wear masks either let us both retain them or 
put them aside together aramis felt the force and justice of the remark saying 
to himself this is no ordinary man are you ambitious said he suddenly to the 
prisoner aloud without preparing him for the alteration what do you mean by 
ambition replied the youth it is replied aramis a feeling which prompts a man 
to desire more than he has i said that i was contented monsieur but perhaps i 
deceive myself i am ignorant of the nature of ambition but it is not impossible 
i may have some come open my mind i ask nothing better an ambitious man said 
aramis is one who covets what is beyond his station i covet nothing beyond my 
station said the young man with an assurance of manner which yet again made the 
bishop of vannes tremble aramis was silent but to look at the kindling eye the 
knitted brow and the reflective attitude of the captive it was evident that he 
expected something more than silence that silence aramis now broke you lied the 
first time i saw you said he lied cried the young man starting up on his couch 
with such a tone in his voice and such lightning in his eyes that aramis 
recoiled in spite of himself i should say returned aramis bowing you concealed 
from me what you knew of your infancy a mans secrets are his own monsieur 
retorted the prisoner and not at the mercy of the first chance-comer true said 
aramis bowing still lower than before t is true pardon me but to-day do i still 
occupy the place of a chance-comer i beseech you to reply monseigneur this 
title slightly disturbed the prisoner but nevertheless he did not appear 
astonished that it was given to him i do not know you monsieur said he oh if i 
but dared i would take your hand and would kiss it the young man seemed as if 
he were going to give aramis his hand but the light which beamed in his eyes 
faded away and he coldly and distrustfully withdrew his hand kiss the hand of a 
prisoner he said shaking his head to what purpose why did you tell me said 
aramis that you were happy here why that you aspired to nothing why in a word 
by thus speaking do you prevent me from being frank in my turn the same light 
shone a third time in the young mans eyes but died as before without leading to 
anything you distrust me said aramis and why say you so monsieur oh for a very 
simple reason if you know what you ought to know you ought to mistrust 
everybody then be not astonished that i am mistrustful since you suspect me of 
knowing what i know not aramis was struck with admiration at this energetic 
resistance oh monseigneur you drive me to despair said he striking the 
arm-chair with his fist and on my part i do not comprehend you monsieur well 
then try to understand me the prisoner looked fixedly at aramis sometimes it 
seems to me said the latter that i have before me the man whom i seek and then 
and then your man disappears is it not so said the prisoner smiling so much the 
better aramis rose certainly said he i have nothing further to say to a man who 
mistrusts me as you do and i monsieur said the prisoner in the same tone have 
nothing to say to a man who will not understand that a prisoner ought to be 
mistrustful of everybody even of old friends said aramis oh monseigneur you are 
too cautious of my old friends you one of my old friends you do you no longer 
remember said aramis that you once saw in the village where your early years 
were spent do you know the name of the village asked the prisoner noisy-le-sec 
monseigneur answered aramis firmly go on said the young man without expression 
of assent or denial on his countenance stay monseigneur said aramis if you are 
positively resolved to carry on this game let us break off i am here to tell 
you many things t is true but you must allow me to see that on your side you 
have a desire to know them before revealing the important matters i conceal be 
assured that i am in need of some encouragement if not candor a little sympathy 
if not confidence but you keep yourself intrenched in a pretended ignorance 
which paralyzes me oh not for the reason you think for ignorant as you may be 
or indifferent as you feign to be you are none the less what you are 
monseigneur and there is nothing nothing mark me which can cause you not to be 
so i promise you replied the prisoner to hear you without impatience only it 
appears to me that i have a right to repeat the question i have already asked 
who are you do you remember fifteen or eighteen years ago seeing at 
noisy-le-sec a cavalier accompanied by a lady plainly dressed in black silk 
with flame-colored ribbons in her hair yes said the young man i once asked the 
name of this cavalier and was told that he called himself the abbe dherblay i 
was astonished that the abbe had so warlike an air and was told that there was 
nothing singular in that seeing that he was one of louis xiiis musketeers well 
said aramis that musketeer of other times that abbe afterwards then bishop of 
vannes is to-day your confessor i know it i recognized you then monseigneur if 
you know that i must add a fact of which you are ignorant that if the king were 
to know this evening of the presence here of this musketeer this abbe this 
bishop this confessor he who has risked everything to visit you would to-morrow 
see glitter the executioners axe at the bottom of a dungeon more gloomy and 
more obscure than yours while hearing these words delivered with emphasis the 
young man had raised himself on his couch and gazed more and more eagerly at 
aramis the result of this scrutiny was that he appeared to derive some 
confidence from it yes he murmured i remember perfectly the woman of whom you 
speak came once with you and twice afterwards with the woman he hesitated with 
another woman who came to see you every month is it not so monseigneur yes do 
you know who this lady was the light seemed ready to flash from the prisoners 
eyes i am aware that she was a lady of the court he said you remember that lady 
well do you not oh my recollection can hardly be very confused on this head 
said the young prisoner i saw that lady once with a gentleman about forty-five 
years old i saw her once with you and with the lady dressed in black with 
flame-colored ribbons i have seen her twice since with the same person these 
four persons with my tutor and old perronnette my jailer and the governor of 
the prison are the only persons with whom i have ever spoken and indeed almost 
the only persons i have ever seen then you were in prison if i am a prisoner 
here there i was comparatively free although in a very narrow sense a house 
which i never quitted a garden surrounded with walls i could not clear these 
constituted my residence but you know it as you have been there in a word being 
accustomed to live within these bounds i never cared to leave them and so you 
will understand monsieur that not having seen anything of the world i can 
desire nothing and therefore if you relate anything you will be obliged to 
explain everything to me and i will do so said aramis bowing for it is my duty 
monseigneur well then begin by telling me who was my tutor a worthy and above 
all an honorable gentleman monseigneur fit guide both for body and soul had you 
ever any reason to complain of him oh no quite the contrary but this gentleman 
of yours often used to tell me that my father and mother were dead did he 
deceive me or did he speak the truth he was compelled to comply with the orders 
given him then he lied in one respect your father is dead and my mother she is 
dead for you but then she lives for others does she not yes and i and i then 
the young man looked sharply at aramis am compelled to live in the obscurity of 
a prison alas i fear so and that because my presence in the world would lead to 
the revelation of a great secret certainly a very great secret my enemy must 
indeed be powerful to be able to shut up in the bastille a child such as i then 
was he is more powerful than my mother then and why do you ask that because my 
mother would have taken my part aramis hesitated yes monseigneur more powerful 
than your mother seeing then that my nurse and preceptor were carried off and 
that i also was separated from them either they were or i am very dangerous to 
my enemy yes a peril from which he freed himself by causing the nurse and 
preceptor to disappear answered aramis quietly disappear cried the prisoner but 
how did they disappear in the surest possible way answered aramis they are dead 
the young man turned visibly pale and passed his hand tremblingly over his face 
from poison he asked from poison the prisoner reflected a moment my enemy must 
indeed have been very cruel or hard beset by necessity to assassinate those two 
innocent persons my sole support for that worthy gentleman and that poor woman 
had never harmed a living being in your family monseigneur necessity is stern 
and so it is necessity which compels me to my great regret to tell you that 
this gentleman and the unhappy lady were assassinated oh you tell me nothing i 
am not aware of said the prisoner knitting his brows how i suspected it why i 
will tell you at this moment the young man supporting himself on his elbows 
drew close to aramiss face with such an expression of dignity of self-command 
and of defiance even that the bishop felt the electricity of enthusiasm strike 
in devouring flashes from that seared heart of his into his brain of adamant 
speak monseigneur i have already told you that by conversing with you i 
endanger my life little value as it has i implore you to accept it as the 
ransom of your own well resumed the young man this is why i suspected that they 
had killed my nurse and my preceptor whom you used to call your father yes whom 
i called my father but whose son i well knew i was not who caused you to 
suppose so just as you monsieur are too respectful for a friend he was also too 
respectful for a father i however said aramis have no intention to disguise 
myself the young man nodded assent and continued undoubtedly i was not destined 
to perpetual seclusion said the prisoner and that which makes me believe so now 
above all is the care that was taken to render me as accomplished a cavalier as 
possible the gentleman attached to my person taught me everything he knew 
himself mathematics a little geometry astronomy fencing and riding every 
morning i went through military exercises and practised on horseback well one 
morning during summer it being very hot i went to sleep in the hall nothing up 
to that period except the respect paid me by my tutor had enlightened me or 
even roused my suspicions i lived as children as birds as plants as the air and 
the sun do i had just turned my fifteenth year this then was eight years ago 
yes nearly but i have ceased to reckon time excuse me but what did your tutor 
tell you to encourage you to work he used to say that a man was bound to make 
for himself in the world that fortune which heaven had refused him at his birth 
he added that being a poor obscure orphan i had no one but myself to look to 
and that nobody either did or ever would take any interest in me i was then in 
the hall i have spoken of asleep from fatigue in fencing my tutor was in his 
room on the first floor just over me suddenly i heard him exclaim and then he 
called perronnette perronnette it was my nurse whom he called yes i know it 
said aramis continue monseigneur very likely she was in the garden for my tutor 
came hastily downstairs i rose anxious at seeing him anxious he opened the 
garden door still crying out perronnette perronnette the windows of the hall 
looked into the court the shutters were closed but through a chink in them i 
saw my tutor draw near a large well which was almost directly under the windows 
of his study he stooped over the brim looked into the well again cried out and 
made wild and affrighted gestures where i was i could not only see but hear and 
see and hear i did go on i pray you said aramis dame perronnette came running 
up hearing the governors cries he went to meet her took her by the arm and drew 
her quickly towards the edge after which as they both bent over it together 
look look cried he what a misfortune calm yourself calm yourself said 
perronnette what is the matter the letter he exclaimed do you see that letter 
to the bottom of the well what letter she cried the letter you see down there 
the last letter from the queen at this word i trembled my tutor he who passed 
for my father he who was continually recommending to me modesty and humility in 
correspondence with the queen the queens last letter cried perronnette without 
showing other astonishment than at seeing this letter at the bottom of the well 
but how came it there a chance dame perronnette a singular chance i was 
entering my room and on opening the door the window too being open a puff of 
air came suddenly and carried off this paper this letter from the queen i 
darted after it and gained the window just in time to see it flutter a moment 
in the breeze and disappear down the well well said dame perronnette and if the 
letter has fallen into the well t is all the same as if it were burned and as 
the queen burns all her letters every time she comes every time she comes so 
this lady who came every month was the queen said the prisoner yes nodded 
aramis doubtless doubtless continued the old gentleman but this letter 
contained instructions how can i follow them write immediately to her give her 
a plain account of the accident and the queen will no doubt write you another 
letter in place of this oh the queen would never believe the story said the 
good gentleman shaking his head she will imagine that i want to keep this 
letter instead of giving it up like the rest so as to have a hold over her she 
is so distrustful and m de mazarin so this devil of an italian is capable of 
having us poisoned at the first breath of suspicion aramis almost imperceptibly 
smiled you know dame perronnette they are both so suspicious in all that 
concerns philippe philippe was the name they gave me said the prisoner well t 
is no use hesitating said dame perronnette somebody must go down the well of 
course so that the person who goes down may read the paper as he is coming up 
but let us choose some villager who cannot read and then you will be at ease 
granted but will not any one who descends guess that a paper must be important 
for which we risk a mans life however you have given me an idea dame 
perronnette somebody shall go down the well but that somebody shall be myself 
but at this notion dame perronnette lamented and cried in such a manner and so 
implored the old nobleman with tears in her eyes that he promised her to obtain 
a ladder long enough to reach down while she went in search of some 
stout-hearted youth whom she was to persuade that a jewel had fallen into the 
well and that this jewel was wrapped in a paper and as paper remarked my 
preceptor naturally unfolds in water the young man would not be surprised at 
finding nothing after all but the letter wide open but perhaps the writing will 
be already effaced by that time said dame perronnette no consequence provided 
we secure the letter on returning it to the queen she will see at once that we 
have not betrayed her and consequently as we shall not rouse the distrust of 
mazarin we shall have nothing to fear from him having come to this resolution 
they parted i pushed back the shutter and seeing that my tutor was about to 
re-enter threw myself on my couch in a confusion of brain caused by all i had 
just heard my tutor opened the door a few moments after and thinking i was 
asleep gently closed it again as soon as ever it was shut i rose and listening 
heard the sound of retiring footsteps then i returned to the shutter and saw my 
tutor and dame perronnette go out together i was alone in the house they had 
hardly closed the gate before i sprang from the window and ran to the well then 
just as my tutor had leaned over so leaned i something white and luminous 
glistened in the green and quivering ripples of the water the brilliant disk 
fascinated and allured me my eyes became fixed and i could hardly breathe the 
well seemed to draw me in with its large mouth and icy breath and i thought i 
read at the bottom of the water characters of fire traced upon the letter the 
queen had touched then scarcely knowing what i was about and urged on by one of 
those instinctive impulses which drive men upon their destruction i made fast 
one end of the rope to the bottom of the well-curb i left the bucket hanging 
about three feet under water at the same time taking infinite pains not to 
disturb that coveted letter which was beginning to change its white tint for a 
greenish hue proof enough that it was sinking and then with a piece of wet 
canvas protecting my hands slid down into the abyss when i saw myself hanging 
over the dark pool when i saw the sky lessening above my head a cold shudder 
came over me i was seized with giddiness and the hair rose on my head but my 
strong will mastered all i gained the water and at once plunged into it holding 
on by one hand while i immersed the other and seized the precious paper which 
alas came in two in my grasp i concealed the fragments in my coat and helping 
myself with my feet against the side of the pit and clinging on with my hands 
agile and vigorous as i was and above all pressed for time i regained the brink 
drenching it as i touched it with the water that streamed from all the lower 
part of my body once out of the well with my prize i rushed into the sunlight 
and took refuge in a kind of shrubbery at the bottom of the garden as i entered 
my hiding-place the bell which resounded when the gate was opened rang it was 
my tutor returning i had but just time i calculated that it would take ten 
minutes before he would gain my place of concealment even if guessing where i 
was he came straight to it and twenty if he were obliged to look for me but 
this was time enough to allow me to read the cherished letter whose fragments i 
hastened to unite again the writing was already fading but i managed to 
decipher it all and what read you there monseigneur asked aramis deeply 
interested quite enough monsieur to see that my tutor was a man of noble rank 
and that perronnette without being a lady of quality was far better than a 
servant and also to perceive that i must myself be high-born since the queen 
anne of austria and mazarin the prime minister commended me so earnestly to 
their care here the young man paused quite overcome and what happened asked 
aramis it happened monsieur answered he that the workmen they had summoned 
found nothing in the well after the closest search that my tutor perceived that 
the brink was watery that i was not so well dried by the sun as to escape dame 
perronnettes observing that my garments were moist and lastly that i was seized 
with a violent fever owing to the chill and the excitement of my discovery an 
attack of delirium supervening during which i related the whole adventure so 
that guided by my avowal my tutor found under the bolster the two pieces of the 
queens letter ah said aramis now i understand beyond this all is conjecture 
doubtless the unfortunate lady and gentleman not daring to keep the occurrence 
secret wrote all to the queen and sent back to her the torn letter after which 
said aramis you were arrested and removed to the bastille as you see then your 
two attendants disappeared alas let us not take up our time with the dead but 
see what can be done with the living you told me you were resigned i repeat it 
without any desire for freedom as i told you without ambition sorrow or thought 
the young man made no answer well asked aramis why are you silent i think that 
i have spoken enough answered the prisoner and that now it is your turn i am 
weary aramis gathered himself up and a shade of deep solemnity spread itself 
over his countenance it was evident that he had reached the crisis in the part 
he had come to the prison to play one question said aramis what is it speak in 
the house you inhabited there were neither looking-glasses nor mirrors were 
there what are those two words and what is their meaning asked the young man i 
do not even know them they designate two pieces of furniture which reflect 
objects so that for instance you may see in them your own lineaments as you see 
mine now with the naked eye no there was neither a glass nor a mirror in the 
house answered the young man aramis looked round him nor is there here either 
he said they have taken the same precaution to what end you will know directly 
now you have told me that you were instructed in mathematics astronomy fencing 
and riding but you have not said a word about history my tutor sometimes 
related to me the principal deeds of the king saint louis king francis i and 
king henry iv is that all that is about all this also was done by design just 
as you were deprived of mirrors which reflect the present so you were left in 
ignorance of history which reflects the past since your imprisonment books have 
been forbidden you so that you are unacquainted with a number of facts by means 
of which you would be able to reconstruct the shattered edifice of your 
recollections and your interests it is true said the young man listen then i 
will in a few words tell you what has passed in france during the last 
twenty-three or twenty-four years that is from the probable date of your birth 
in a word from the time that interests you say on and the young man resumed his 
serious and attentive attitude do you know who was the son of henry iv at least 
i know who his successor was how by means of a coin dated which bears the 
effigy of henry iv and another of bearing that of louis xiii so i presumed that 
there being only two years between the two dates louis was henrys successor 
then said aramis you know that the last reigning monarch was louis xiii i do 
answered the youth slightly reddening well he was a prince full of noble ideas 
and great projects always alas deferred by the troubles of the times and the 
struggle that his minister richelieu had to maintain against the great nobles 
of france the king himself was of a feeble character and died young and unhappy 
i know it he had been long anxious about having an heir a care which weighs 
heavily on princes who desire to leave behind them more than one pledge that 
they will be remembered and their work will be continued did king louis xiii 
die without children asked the prisoner smiling no but he was long without one 
and for a long while thought he should be the last of his race this idea had 
reduced him to the depths of despair when suddenly his wife anne of austria the 
prisoner trembled did you know said aramis that louis xiiis wife was called 
anne of austria continue said the young man without replying to the question 
when suddenly resumed aramis the queen announced an interesting event there was 
great joy at the intelligence and all prayed for her happy delivery on the th 
of september she gave birth to a son here aramis looked at his companion and 
thought he observed him turning pale you are about to hear said aramis an 
account which few could now give for it refers to a secret which is thought to 
be buried with the dead or entombed in the abyss of the confessional and you 
will tell me this secret broke in the youth oh said aramis with unmistakable 
emphasis i do not know that i ought to risk this secret by intrusting it to one 
who has no desire to quit the bastille i listen monsieur the queen then gave 
birth to a son but while the court was rejoicing over the event when the king 
had shown the new-born child to the nobility and people and was sitting gayly 
down to table to celebrate the event the queen who was alone in her room was 
again taken ill and gave birth to a second son oh said the prisoner betraying a 
better acquaintance with affairs than he had admitted i thought that monsieur 
was only born in aramis raised his finger let me continue he said the prisoner 
sighed impatiently and paused yes said aramis the queen had a second son whom 
dame perronnette the midwife received in her arms dame perronnette murmured the 
young man they ran at once to the banqueting-room and whispered to the king 
what had happened he rose and quitted the table but this time it was no longer 
happiness that his face expressed but something akin to terror the birth of 
twins changed into bitterness the joy to which that of an only son had given 
rise seeing that in france a fact of which you are assuredly ignorant it is the 
oldest of the kings sons who succeeds his father i know it and that the doctors 
and jurists assert that there is ground for doubting whether he who first makes 
his appearance is the elder by the law of heaven and of nature the prisoner 
uttered a smothered cry and became whiter than the coverlet under which he hid 
himself now you understand pursued aramis that the king who with so much 
pleasure saw himself repeated in one was in despair about two fearing that the 
second might dispute the claim of the first to seniority which had been 
recognized only two hours before and so this second son relying on party 
interests and caprices might one day sow discord and engender civil war in the 
kingdom by these means destroying the very dynasty he should have strengthened 
oh i understand i understand murmured the young man well continued aramis this 
is what is related this is why one of the queens two sons shamefully parted 
from his brother shamefully sequestered is buried in the profoundest obscurity 
this is why that second son has disappeared and so completely that not a soul 
in france save his mother is aware of his existence yes his mother who has cast 
him off cried the prisoner in a tone of despair except also aramis went on the 
lady in the black dress and finally excepting excepting yourself is it not you 
who come and relate all this you who come to rouse in my soul curiosity hatred 
ambition and perhaps even the thirst of vengeance except you monsieur who if 
you are the man whom i expect to whom the note i have received applies whom in 
short heaven ought to send me must possess about you what asked aramis a 
portrait of the king louis xiv who at this moment reigns upon the throne of 
france here is the portrait replied the bishop handing the prisoner a miniature 
in enamel on which louis was depicted life-like with a handsome lofty mien the 
prisoner eagerly seized the portrait and gazed at it with devouring eyes and 
now monseigneur said aramis here is a mirror aramis left the prisoner time to 
recover his ideas so high so high murmured the young man eagerly comparing the 
likeness of louis with his own countenance reflected in the glass what do you 
think of it at length said aramis i think that i am lost replied the captive 
the king will never set me free and i i demand added the bishop fixing his 
piercing eyes significantly upon the prisoner i demand which of the two is the 
king the one whom this miniature portrays or the one whom the glass reflects 
the king monsieur sadly replied the young man is he who is on the throne who is 
not in prison and who on the other hand can cause others to be entombed there 
royalty is power and you see well how powerless i am monseigneur answered 
aramis with a respect he had not yet manifested the king mark me will if you 
desire it be he who quitting his dungeon shall maintain himself upon the throne 
on which his friends will place him tempt me not monsieur broke in the prisoner 
bitterly be not weak monseigneur persisted aramis i have brought all the proofs 
of your birth consult them satisfy yourself that you are a kings son and then 
let us act no no it is impossible unless indeed resumed the bishop ironically 
it be the destiny of your race that the brothers excluded from the throne shall 
be always princes without valor and without honor as was your uncle m gaston 
dorleans who ten times conspired against his brother louis xiii what cried the 
prince astonished my uncle gaston conspired against his brother conspired to 
dethrone him exactly monseigneur for no other reason what are you telling me 
monsieur i tell you the truth and he had friends devoted ones as much so as i 
am to you and after all what did he do failed he failed i admit but always 
through his own fault and for the sake of purchasing not his life for the life 
of the kings brother is sacred and inviolable but his liberty he sacrificed the 
lives of all his friends one after another and so at this day he is the very 
shame of history and the detestation of a hundred noble families in this 
kingdom i understand monsieur either by weakness or treachery my uncle slew his 
friends by weakness which in princes is always treachery and cannot a man fail 
then from incapacity and ignorance do you really believe it possible that a 
poor captive such as i brought up not only at a distance from the court but 
even from the world do you believe it possible that such a one could assist 
those of his friends who should attempt to serve him and as aramis was about to 
reply the young man suddenly cried out with a violence which betrayed the 
temper of his blood we are speaking of friends but how can i have any friends i 
whom no one knows and who have neither liberty money nor influence to gain any 
i fancy i had the honor to offer myself to your royal highness oh do not style 
me so monsieur t is either irony or cruelty do not lead me to think of aught 
else than these prison walls which confine me let me again love or at least 
submit to my slavery and my obscurity monseigneur monseigneur if you again 
utter these desperate words if after having received proof of your high birth 
you still remain poor-spirited and of feeble purpose i will comply with your 
desire i will depart and renounce forever the service of a master to whom so 
eagerly i came to devote my assistance and my life monsieur cried the prince 
would it not have been better for you to have reflected before telling me all 
that you have done that you would break my heart forever and so i desired to do 
monseigneur is a prison the fitting place to talk to me about power grandeur 
and even royalty you wish to make me believe in splendor and we are lying 
hidden in night you boast of glory and we are smothering our words in the 
curtains of this miserable bed you give me glimpses of absolute power and i 
hear the step of the jailer in the corridor that step which after all makes you 
tremble more than it does me to render me somewhat less incredulous free me 
from the bastille give air to my lungs spurs to my feet a sword to my arm and 
we shall begin to understand each other it is precisely my intention to give 
you all this monseigneur and more only do you desire it a word more said the 
prince i know there are guards in every gallery bolts to every door cannon and 
soldiery at every barrier how will you overcome the sentries spike the guns how 
will you break through the bolts and bars monseigneur how did you get the note 
which announced my arrival to you you can bribe a jailer for such a thing as a 
note if we can corrupt one turnkey we can corrupt ten well i admit that it may 
be possible to release a poor captive from the bastille possible so to conceal 
him that the kings people shall not again ensnare him possible in some unknown 
retreat to sustain the unhappy wretch in some suitable manner monseigneur said 
aramis smiling i admit that whoever would do thus much for me would seem more 
than mortal in my eyes but as you tell me i am a prince brother of a king how 
can you restore me the rank and power of which my mother and my brother have 
deprived me and as i must pass a life of war and hatred how will you make me 
conqueror in those combats and invulnerable to my enemies ah monsieur reflect 
upon this place me to-morrow in some dark cavern in a mountains base yield me 
the delight of hearing in freedom the sounds of river and plain of beholding in 
freedom the sun of the blue heavens or the stormy sky and it is enough promise 
me no more than this for indeed more you cannot give and it would be a crime to 
deceive me since you call yourself my friend aramis waited in silence 
monseigneur he resumed after a moments reflection i admire the firm sound sense 
which dictates your words i am happy to have discovered my monarchs mind again 
again oh for mercys sake cried the prince pressing his icy hands upon his 
clammy brow do not play with me i have no need to be a king to be the happiest 
of men but i monseigneur wish you to be a king for the good of humanity ah said 
the prince with fresh distrust inspired by the word ah with what then has 
humanity to reproach my brother i forgot to say monseigneur that if you 
condescend to allow me to guide you and if you consent to become the most 
powerful monarch on earth you will have promoted the interests of all the 
friends whom i devote to the success of your cause and these friends are 
numerous numerous still less numerous than powerful monseigneur explain 
yourself it is impossible i will explain i swear before heaven on that day when 
i see you sitting on the throne of france but my brother you shall decree his 
fate do you pity him him who leaves me to perish in a dungeon no i do not pity 
him so much the better he might have himself come to this prison have taken me 
by the hand and have said my brother heaven created us to love not to contend 
with each other i come to you a barbarous prejudice has condemned you to pass 
your days in obscurity far from all men and deprived of every joy i will make 
you sit down beside me i will buckle round your waist our fathers sword will 
you take advantage of this reconciliation to put down or to restrain me will 
you employ that sword to spill my blood oh never i would have replied to him i 
look on you as my preserver and will respect you as my master you give me far 
more than heaven bestowed for through you i possess liberty and the privilege 
of loving and being loved in this world and you would have kept your word 
monseigneur oh on my life while now while now i perceive that i have guilty 
ones to punish in what manner monseigneur what do you say as to the resemblance 
that heaven has given me to my brother i say that there was in that likeness a 
providential instruction which the king ought to have heeded i say that your 
mother committed a crime in rendering those different in happiness and fortune 
whom nature created so similar in her womb and i conclude that the object of 
punishment should be only to restore the equilibrium by which you mean that if 
i restore you to your place on your brothers throne he shall take yours in 
prison alas there is so much suffering in prison especially to a man who has 
drunk so deeply of the cup of enjoyment your royal highness will always be free 
to act as you may desire and if it seems good to you after punishment may 
pardon good and now are you aware of one thing monsieur tell me my prince it is 
that i will hear nothing further from you till i am clear of the bastille i was 
going to say to your highness that i should only have the pleasure of seeing 
you once again and when the day when my prince leaves these gloomy walls 
heavens how will you give me notice by coming here to seek you yourself my 
prince do not leave this chamber save with me or if in my absence you are 
compelled to do so remember that i am not concerned in it and so i am not to 
speak a word of this to any one whatever save to you save only to me aramis 
bowed very low the prince offered his hand monsieur he said in a tone that 
issued from his heart one word more my last if you have sought me for my 
destruction if you are only a tool in the hands of my enemies if from our 
conference in which you have sounded the depths of my mind anything worse than 
captivity result that is to say if death befall me still receive my blessing 
for you will have ended my troubles and given me repose from the tormenting 
fever that has preyed upon me these eight years monseigneur wait the result ere 
you judge me said aramis i say that in such a case i should bless and forgive 
you if on the other hand you are come to restore me to that position in the 
sunshine of fortune and glory to which i was destined by heaven if by your aid 
i am enabled to live in the memory of man and confer lustre on my race by deeds 
of valor or by solid benefits bestowed upon my people if from my present depths 
of sorrow aided by your generous hand i raise myself to the very height of 
honor then to you whom i thank with blessings to you will i offer half my power 
and my glory though you would still be but partly recompensed and your share 
must always remain incomplete since i could not divide with you the happiness 
received at your hands monseigneur replied aramis moved by the pallor and 
excitement of the young man the nobleness of your heart fills me with joy and 
admiration it is not you who will have to thank me but rather the nation whom 
you will render happy the posterity whose name you will make glorious yes i 
shall have bestowed upon you more than life i shall give you immortality the 
prince offered his hand to aramis who sank upon his knee and kissed it oh cried 
the prince with a charming modesty it is the first act of homage paid to our 
future king said aramis when i see you again i shall say good-day sire till 
then said the young man pressing his wan and wasted fingers over his heart till 
then no more dreams no more strain upon my life it would break oh monsieur how 
small is my prison how low the window how narrow are the doors to think that so 
much pride splendor and happiness should be able to enter in and remain here 
your royal highness makes me proud said aramis since you imply it is i who 
brought all this and he rapped immediately on the door the jailer came to open 
it with baisemeaux who devoured by fear and uneasiness was beginning in spite 
of himself to listen at the door happily neither of the speakers had forgotten 
to smother his voice even in the most passionate outbreaks what a confession 
said the governor forcing a laugh who would believe that a mere recluse a man 
almost dead could have committed crimes so numerous and taking so long to tell 
of aramis made no reply he was eager to leave the bastille where the secret 
which overwhelmed him seemed to double the weight of the walls as soon as they 
reached baisemeauxs quarters let us proceed to business my dear governor said 
aramis alas replied baisemeaux you have to ask me for my receipt for one 
hundred and fifty thousand livres said the bishop and to pay over the first 
third of the sum added the poor governor with a sigh taking three steps towards 
his iron strong-box here is the receipt said aramis and here is the money 
returned baisemeaux with a threefold sigh the order instructed me only to give 
a receipt it said nothing about receiving the money rejoined aramis adieu 
monsieur the governor and he departed leaving baisemeaux stifled with joy and 
surprise at this regal gift so grandly given by the confessor extraordinary to 
the bastille chapter xxx how mouston had become fatter without giving porthos 
notice thereof and of the troubles which consequently befell that worthy 
gentleman after the departure of athos for blois porthos and dartagnan were 
seldom together one was occupied with harassing duties for the king the other 
had been making many purchases of furniture which he intended to forward to his 
estate and by aid of which he hoped to establish in his various residences 
something of that court luxury which he had witnessed in all its dazzling 
brightness in his majestys society dartagnan ever faithful one morning during 
an interval of service thought about porthos and being uneasy at not having 
heard anything of him for a fortnight directed his steps towards his hotel and 
pounced upon him just as he was getting up the worthy baron had a pensive nay 
more a melancholy air he was sitting on his bed only half dressed and with legs 
dangling over the edge contemplating a great number of garments which with 
their fringes lace embroidery and slashes of ill-assorted hues were strewed all 
over the floor porthos sad and reflective as la fontaines hare did not observe 
dartagnans entrance which was moreover screened at this moment by m mouston 
whose personal corpulence quite enough at any time to hide one man from another 
was for the moment doubled by a scarlet coat which the intendant was holding up 
by the sleeves for his masters inspection that he might the better see it all 
over dartagnan stopped at the threshold and looked at the pensive porthos and 
then as the sight of the innumerable garments strewing the floor caused mighty 
sighs to heave from the bosom of that excellent gentleman dartagnan thought it 
time to put an end to these dismal reflections and coughed by way of announcing 
himself ah exclaimed porthos whose countenance brightened with joy ah ah here 
is dartagnan i shall then get hold of an idea at these words mouston doubting 
what was going on behind him got out of the way smiling kindly at the friend of 
his master who thus found himself freed from the material obstacle which had 
prevented his reaching dartagnan porthos made his sturdy knees crack again in 
rising and crossing the room in two strides found himself face to face with his 
friend whom he folded to his breast with a force of affection that seemed to 
increase with every day ah he repeated you are always welcome dear friend but 
just now you are more welcome than ever but you seem in the dumps here 
exclaimed dartagnan porthos replied by a look expressive of dejection well then 
tell me all about it porthos my friend unless it is a secret in the first place 
returned porthos you know i have no secrets from you this then is what saddens 
me wait a minute porthos let me first get rid of all this litter of satin and 
velvet oh never mind said porthos contemptuously it is all trash trash porthos 
cloth at twenty livres an ell gorgeous satin regal velvet then you think these 
clothes are splendid porthos splendid ill wager that you alone in france have 
so many and suppose you never had any more made and were to live a hundred 
years which wouldnt astonish me you could still wear a new dress the day of 
your death without being obliged to see the nose of a single tailor from now 
till then porthos shook his head come my friend said dartagnan this unnatural 
melancholy in you frightens me my dear porthos pray get out of it the sooner 
the better yes my friend so i will if indeed it is possible perhaps you have 
received bad news from bracieux no they have felled the wood and it has yielded 
a third more than the estimate then there has been a falling off in the pools 
of pierrefonds no my friend they have been fished and there is enough left to 
stock all the pools in the neighborhood perhaps your estate at vallon has been 
destroyed by an earthquake no my friend on the contrary the ground was struck 
by lightning a hundred paces from the chateau and a fountain sprung up in a 
place entirely destitute of water well then what is the matter the fact is i 
have received an invitation for the fete at vaux said porthos with a lugubrious 
expression well do you complain of that the king has caused a hundred mortal 
heart-burnings among the courtiers by refusing invitations and so my dear 
friend you are of the party for vaux bless my soul indeed i am you will see a 
magnificent sight alas i doubt it though everything that is grand in france 
will be brought together there ah cried porthos tearing out a lock of his hair 
in despair eh good heavens are you ill cried dartagnan i am as strong as the 
pont-neuf it isnt that but what is it then it is that i have no clothes 
dartagnan stood petrified no clothes porthos no clothes he cried when i see 
more than fifty suits on the floor fifty yes but not one that fits me what not 
one that fits you but are you not measured then when you give an order to be 
sure he is answered mouston but unfortunately i have grown stouter what you 
stouter so much so that i am now bigger than the baron would you believe it 
monsieur parbleu it seems to me that is quite evident do you see stupid said 
porthos that is quite evident be still my dear porthos resumed dartagnan 
becoming slightly impatient i dont understand why your clothes should not fit 
you because mouston has grown stouter i am going to explain it said porthos you 
remember having related to me the story of the roman general antony who had 
always seven wild boars kept roasting cooked to different degrees so that he 
might be able to have his dinner at any time of the day he chose to ask for it 
well then i resolved as at any time i might be invited to court to spend a week 
i resolved to have always seven suits ready for the occasion capitally reasoned 
porthos only a man must have a fortune like yours to gratify such whims without 
counting the time lost in being measured the fashions are always changing that 
is exactly the point said porthos in regard to which i flattered myself i had 
hit on a very ingenious device tell me what it is for i dont doubt your genius 
you remember that mouston once was thin yes when he was called mousqueton and 
you remember too the period when he began to grow fatter no not exactly i beg 
your pardon my good mouston oh you are not in fault monsieur said mouston 
graciously you were in paris and as for us we were in pierrefonds well well my 
dear porthos there was a time when mouston began to grow fat is that what you 
wished to say yes my friend and i greatly rejoiced over it at that time indeed 
i believe you did exclaimed dartagnan you understand continued porthos what a 
world of trouble it spared me no my dear friend i do not yet understand but 
perhaps with the help of explanation here it is my friend in the first place as 
you have said to be measured is a loss of time even though it occur only once a 
fortnight and then one may be travelling and may wish to have seven suits 
always ready in short i have a horror of letting any one take my measure 
confound it either one is a gentleman or he is not to be scrutinized and 
scanned by a fellow who completely analyzes you by inch and line tis degrading 
here they find you too hollow there too prominent they recognize your strong 
and weak points see now when we leave the measurers hands we are like those 
strongholds whose angles and different thicknesses have been ascertained by a 
spy in truth my dear porthos you possess ideas entirely your own ah you see 
when a man is an engineer and has fortified belle-isle tis natural my friend 
well i had an idea which would doubtless have proved a good one but for 
moustons carelessness dartagnan glanced at mouston who replied by a slight 
movement of his body as if to say you will see whether i am at all to blame in 
all this i congratulated myself then resumed porthos at seeing mouston get fat 
and i did all i could by means of substantial feeding to make him stout always 
in the hope that he would come to equal myself in girth and could then be 
measured in my stead ah cried dartagnan i see that spared you both time and 
humiliation consider my joy when after a year and a halfs judicious feeding for 
i used to feed him myself the fellow oh i lent a good hand myself monsieur said 
mouston humbly thats true consider my joy when one morning i perceived mouston 
was obliged like myself to compress himself to get through the little secret 
door that those fools of architects had made in the chamber of the late madame 
du vallon in the chateau of pierrefonds and by the way about that door my 
friend i should like to ask you who know everything why these wretches of 
architects who ought by rights to have the compasses in their eye came to make 
doorways through which nobody but thin people could pass oh those doors 
answered dartagnan were meant for gallants and they have generally slight and 
slender figures madame du vallon had no gallant answered porthos majestically 
perfectly true my friend resumed dartagnan but the architects were imagining 
the possibility of your marrying again ah that is possible said porthos and now 
that i have received an explanation why doorways are made too narrow let us 
return to the subject of moustons fatness but see how the two things fit each 
other i have always noticed that ideas run parallel and so observe this 
phenomenon dartagnan i was talking to you of mouston who is fat and it led us 
on to madame du vallon who was thin hum is it not marvellous my dear friend a 
savant of my acquaintance m costar has made the same observation as you have 
and he calls the process by some greek name which i forget what my remark is 
not then original cried porthos astounded i thought i was the discoverer my 
friend the fact was known before aristotles days that is to say about two 
thousand years ago well well tis no less true remarked porthos delighted at the 
idea of having concurred with the sages of antiquity wonderfully but suppose we 
return to mouston it seems to me we have left him fattening under our very eyes 
yes monsieur said mouston well said porthos mouston fattened so well that he 
gratified all my hopes by reaching my standard a fact of which i was well able 
to convince myself by seeing the rascal one day in a waistcoat of mine which he 
had turned into a coat a waistcoat the mere embroidery of which was worth a 
hundred pistoles twas only to try it on monsieur said mouston from that moment 
i determined to put mouston in communication with my tailors and to have him 
measured instead of myself a capital idea porthos but mouston is a foot and a 
half shorter than you exactly they measured him down to the ground and the end 
of the skirt came just below my knee what a wonder you are porthos such a thing 
could happen only to you ah yes pay your compliments there is something upon 
which to base them it was exactly at that time that is to say nearly two years 
and a half ago that i set out for belle-isle instructing mouston so as always 
to have in every event a pattern of every fashion to have a coat made for 
himself every month and did mouston neglect to comply with your instructions oh 
that would not be right mouston no monsieur quite the contrary quite the 
contrary no he never forgot to have his coats made but he forgot to inform me 
that he had grown stouter but it was not my fault monsieur your tailor never 
told me and this to such an extent monsieur continued porthos that the fellow 
in two years has gained eighteen inches in girth and so my last dozen coats are 
all too large in progressive measure from a foot to a foot and a half but the 
rest those which were made when you were of the same size they are no longer 
the fashion my dear friend were i to put them on i should look like a fresh 
arrival from siam and as though i had been two years away from court i 
understand your difficulty you have how many new suits thirty-six and yet not 
one to wear well you must have a thirty-seventh made and give the thirty-six to 
mouston ah monsieur said mouston with a gratified air the truth is that 
monsieur has always been very generous to me do you mean to think that i hadnt 
that idea or that i was deterred by the expense but it wants only two days to 
the fete i received the invitation yesterday made mouston post hither with my 
wardrobe and only this morning discovered my misfortune and from now till the 
day after to-morrow there isnt a single fashionable tailor who will undertake 
to make me a suit that is to say one covered with gold isnt it i especially 
wish it so oh we shall manage it you wont leave for three days the invitations 
are for wednesday and this is only sunday morning tis true but aramis has 
strongly advised me to be at vaux twenty-four hours beforehand how aramis yes 
it was aramis who brought me the invitation ah to be sure i see you are invited 
on the part of m fouquet by no means by the king dear friend the letter bears 
the following as large as life m le baron du vallon is informed that the king 
has condescended to place him on the invitation list very good but you leave 
with m fouquet and when i think cried porthos stamping on the floor when i 
think i shall have no clothes i am ready to burst with rage i should like to 
strangle somebody or destroy something neither strangle anybody nor destroy 
anything porthos i will manage it all put on one of your thirty-six suits and 
come with me to a tailor pooh my agent has seen them all this morning even m 
percerin who is m percerin he is the kings tailor parbleu oh ah yes said 
porthos who wished to appear to know the kings tailor but now heard his name 
mentioned for the first time to m percerins by jove i thought he would be too 
much engaged doubtless he will be but be at ease porthos he will do for me what 
he wont do for another only you must allow yourself to be measured ah said 
porthos with a sigh tis vexatious but what would you have me do do as others do 
as the king does what do they measure the king too does he put up with it the 
king is a beau my good friend and so are you too whatever you may say about it 
porthos smiled triumphantly let us go to the kings tailor he said and since he 
measures the king i think by my faith i may well allow him to measure me 
chapter xxxi who messire jean percerin was the kings tailor messire jean 
percerin occupied a rather large house in the rue st honore near the rue de 
larbre sec he was a man of great taste in elegant stuffs embroideries and 
velvet being hereditary tailor to the king the preferment of his house reached 
as far back as the time of charles ix from whose reign dated as we know fancies 
in bravery difficult enough to gratify the percerin of that period was a 
huguenot like ambroise pare and had been spared by the queen of navarre the 
beautiful margot as they used to write and say too in those days because in 
sooth he was the only one who could make for her those wonderful riding-habits 
which she preferred to wear seeing that they were marvellously well suited to 
hide certain anatomical defects which the queen of navarre used very studiously 
to conceal percerin being saved made out of gratitude some beautiful black 
bodices very inexpensive indeed for queen catherine who ended by being pleased 
at the preservation of a huguenot on whom she had long looked with aversion but 
percerin was a prudent man and having heard it said that there was no more 
dangerous sign for a huguenot than to be smiled upon by catherine and having 
observed that her smiles were more frequent than usual he speedily turned 
catholic with all his family and having thus become irreproachable attained the 
lofty position of master tailor to the crown of france under henry iii gay king 
as he was this position was as high as one of the loftiest peaks of the 
cordilleras now percerin had been a clever man all his life and by way of 
keeping up his reputation beyond the grave took very good care not to make a 
bad death of it and so contrived to die very seasonably at the very moment he 
felt his powers of invention declining he left a son and daughter both worthy 
of the name they were called upon to bear the son a cutter as unerring and 
exact as the square rule the daughter apt at embroidery and at designing 
ornaments the marriage of henry iv and marie de medicis and the exquisite court 
mourning for the aforementioned queen together with a few words let fall by m 
de bassompierre king of the beaux of that period made the fortune of the second 
generation of percerins m concino concini and his wife galigai who subsequently 
shone at the french court sought to italianize the fashion and introduced some 
florentine tailors but percerin touched to the quick in his patriotism and his 
self-esteem entirely defeated these foreigners by his designs in brocatelle so 
effectually that concino was the first to give up his compatriots and held the 
french tailor in such esteem that he would never employ any other and thus wore 
a doublet of his on the very day that vitry blew out his brains with his pistol 
at the pont du louvre it was that doublet issuing from m percerins workshop 
which the parisians rejoiced in hacking into so many pieces with the human 
flesh it covered notwithstanding the favor concino concini had shown percerin 
the king louis xiii had the generosity to bear no malice to his tailor and to 
retain him in his service at the time when louis the just afforded this great 
example of equity percerin had brought up two sons one of whom made his debut 
at the marriage of anne of austria invented that admirable spanish costume in 
which richelieu danced a saraband made the costumes for the tragedy of mirame 
and stitched on to buckinghams mantle those famous pearls which were destined 
to be scattered on the floors of the louvre a man becomes easily illustrious 
who has made the dresses of m de buckingham m de cinq-mars mademoiselle ninon m 
de beaufort and marion de lorme and thus percerin iii had attained the summit 
of his glory when his father died this same percerin iii old famous and wealthy 
yet further dressed louis xiv and having no son which was a great cause of 
sorrow to him seeing that with himself his dynasty would end he had brought up 
several hopeful pupils he possessed a carriage a country-house lackeys the 
tallest in paris and by special authority from louis xiv a pack of hounds he 
worked for messieurs de lyonne and letellier under a sort of patronage but 
politic man as he was and versed in state secrets he never succeeded in fitting 
m colbert this is beyond explanation it is a matter for intuition great 
geniuses of every kind live upon unseen intangible ideas they act without 
themselves knowing why the great percerin for contrary to the rule of dynasties 
it was above all the last of the percerins who deserved the name of great the 
great percerin was inspired when he cut a robe for the queen or a coat for the 
king he could invent a mantle for monsieur a clock for madames stocking but in 
spite of his supreme genius he could never hit the measure of m colbert that 
man he used often to say is beyond my art my needle never can hit him off we 
need scarcely say that percerin was m fouquets tailor and that the 
superintendent highly esteemed him m percerin was nearly eighty years old 
nevertheless still fresh and at the same time so dry the courtiers used to say 
that he was positively brittle his renown and his fortune were great enough for 
monsieur the prince that king of fops to take his arm when talking over the 
fashions and for those least eager to pay never to dare to leave their accounts 
in arrear with him for m percerin would for the first time make clothes upon 
credit but the second never unless paid for the former order it is easy to see 
that a tailor of such standing instead of running after customers would make 
difficulties about receiving new ones and so percerin declined to fit bourgeois 
or those who had but recently obtained patents of nobility it was stated even 
that m de mazarin in return for a full suit of ceremonial vestments as cardinal 
one fine day slipped letters of nobility into his pocket percerin was endowed 
with intelligence and wit he might be called very lively at eighty years of age 
he still took with a steady hand the measure of womens waists it was to the 
house of this great lord of tailors that dartagnan took the despairing porthos 
who as they were going along said to his friend take care my good dartagnan not 
to compromise the dignity of a man such as i am with the arrogance of this 
percerin who will i expect be very impertinent for i give you notice my friend 
that if he is wanting in respect to me i will chastise him presented by me 
replied dartagnan you have nothing to fear even though you were what you are 
not ah tis because what have you anything against percerin porthos i think that 
i once sent mouston to a fellow of that name and then the fellow refused to 
supply me oh a misunderstanding no doubt which tis pressing to set right 
mouston must have made a mistake perhaps he has confused the names possibly 
that rascal mouston never can remember names i will take it all upon myself 
very good stop the carriage porthos here we are here how here we are at the 
halles and you told me the house was at the corner of the rue de larbre-sec tis 
true but look well i do look and i see what pardieu that we are at the halles 
you do not i suppose want our horses to clamber up on the top of the carriage 
in front of us no nor the carriage in front of us to mount on the one in front 
of it still less nor that the second should be driven over the roofs of the 
thirty or forty others which have arrived before us no you are right indeed 
what a number of people and what are they all about tis very simple they are 
waiting their turn bah have the comedians of the hotel de bourgogne shifted 
their quarters no their turn to obtain an entrance to m percerins house and we 
are going to wait too oh we shall show ourselves more ready and less proud than 
they what are we to do then get down pass through the footmen and lackeys and 
enter the tailors house which i will answer for our doing especially if you go 
first come then said porthos they both alighted and made their way on foot 
towards the establishment the cause of the confusion was that m percerins doors 
were closed while a servant standing before them was explaining to the 
illustrious customers of the illustrious tailor that just then m percerin could 
not receive anybody it was bruited about outside still on the authority of what 
the great lackey had said confidentially to some great noble whom he favored 
that m percerin was engaged upon five dresses for the king and that owing to 
the urgency of the case he was meditating in his office on the ornaments colors 
and cut of these five suits some contented with this reason went away again 
happy to repeat it to others but others more tenacious insisted on having the 
doors opened and among these last three blue ribbons intended to take part in a 
ballet which would inevitably fail unless the said three had their costumes 
shaped by the very hand of the great percerin himself dartagnan pushing on 
porthos who scattered the groups of people right and left succeeded in gaining 
the counter behind which the journeymen tailors were doing their best to answer 
questions we forgot to mention that at the door they wanted to put off porthos 
like the rest but dartagnan showing himself pronounced merely these words the 
kings order and was let in with his friend those poor devils had enough to do 
and did their best to reply to the demands of the customers in the absence of 
their master leaving off drawing a stitch to turn a sentence and when wounded 
pride or disappointed expectation brought down upon them too cutting rebukes he 
who was attacked made a dive and disappeared under the counter the line of 
discontented lords formed a picture full of curious details our captain of 
musketeers a man of sure and rapid observation took it all in at a glance but 
having run over the groups his eye rested on a man in front of him this man 
seated upon a stool scarcely showed his head above the counter which sheltered 
him he was about forty years of age with a melancholy aspect pale face and soft 
luminous eyes he was looking at dartagnan and the rest with his chin resting 
upon his hand like a calm and inquiring spectator only on perceiving and 
doubtless recognizing our captain he pulled his hat down over his eyes it was 
this action perhaps that attracted dartagnans attention if so the gentleman who 
had pulled down his hat produced an effect entirely different from what he had 
desired in other respects his costume was plain and his hair evenly cut enough 
for customers who were not close observers to take him for a mere tailors 
apprentice perched behind the board and carefully stitching cloth or velvet 
nevertheless this man held up his head too often to be very productively 
employed with his fingers dartagnan was not deceived not he and he saw at once 
that if this man was working on anything it certainly was not on cloth eh said 
he addressing this man and so you have become a tailors boy m moliere hush m 
dartagnan replied the man softly in heavens name you will make them recognize 
me well and what harm the fact is there is no harm but you were going to say 
there is no good in doing it either is it not so alas no for i was occupied in 
looking at some excellent figures go on go on m moliere i quite understand the 
interest you take in it i will not disturb your study thank you but on one 
condition that you tell me where m percerin really is oh willingly in his own 
room only only that one cant enter it unapproachable for everybody for 
everybody he brought me here so that i might be at my ease to make my 
observations and then he went away well my dear m moliere but you will go and 
tell him i am here i exclaimed moliere in the tone of a courageous dog from 
which you snatch the bone it has legitimately gained i disturb myself ah m 
dartagnan how hard you are upon me if you dont go directly and tell m percerin 
that i am here my dear moliere said dartagnan in a low tone i warn you of one 
thing that i wont exhibit to you the friend i have brought with me moliere 
indicated porthos by an imperceptible gesture this gentleman is it not yes 
moliere fixed upon porthos one of those looks which penetrate the minds and 
hearts of men the subject doubtless appeared very promising to him for he 
immediately rose and led the way into the adjoining chamber chapter xxxii the 
samples during all this time the crowd was slowly rolling on leaving at every 
angle of the counter either a murmur or a menace as the waves leave foam or 
scattered seaweed on the sands when they retire with the ebbing tide in about 
ten minutes moliere reappeared making another sign to dartagnan from under the 
hangings the latter hurried after him with porthos in the rear and after 
threading a labyrinth of corridors introduced him to m percerins room the old 
man with his sleeves turned up was gathering up in folds a piece of 
gold-flowered brocade so as the better to exhibit its lustre perceiving 
dartagnan he put the silk aside and came to meet him by no means radiant and by 
no means courteous but on the whole in a tolerably civil manner the captain of 
the musketeers will excuse me i am sure for i am engaged eh yes on the kings 
costumes i know that my dear m percerin you are making three they tell me five 
my dear monsieur five three or five tis all the same to me my dear monsieur and 
i know that you will make them most exquisitely yes i know once made they will 
be the most beautiful in the world i do not deny it but that they may be the 
most beautiful in the world they must first be made and to do this captain i am 
pressed for time oh bah there are two days yet tis much more than you require m 
percerin said dartagnan in the coolest possible manner percerin raised his head 
with the air of a man little accustomed to be contradicted even in his whims 
but dartagnan did not pay the least attention to the airs which the illustrious 
tailor began to assume my dear m percerin he continued i bring you a customer 
ah ah exclaimed percerin crossly m le baron du vallon de bracieux de 
pierrefonds continued dartagnan percerin attempted a bow which found no favor 
in the eyes of the terrible porthos who from his first entry into the room had 
been regarding the tailor askance a very good friend of mine concluded 
dartagnan i will attend to monsieur said percerin but later later but when why 
when i have time you have already told my valet as much broke in porthos 
discontentedly very likely said percerin i am nearly always pushed for time my 
friend returned porthos sententiously there is always time when one chooses to 
find it percerin turned crimson a very ominous sign indeed in old men blanched 
by age monsieur said he is very free to confer his custom elsewhere come come 
percerin interposed dartagnan you are not in a good temper to-day well i will 
say one more word to you which will bring you on your knees monsieur is not 
only a good friend of mine but more a friend of m fouquet ah ah exclaimed the 
tailor that is another thing then turning to porthos monsieur the baron is 
attached to the superintendent he inquired i am attached to myself shouted 
porthos at the very moment when the tapestry was raised to introduce a new 
speaker in the dialogue moliere was all observation dartagnan laughed porthos 
swore my dear percerin said dartagnan you will make a dress for the baron tis i 
who ask you to you i will not say nay captain but that is not all you will make 
it for him at once tis impossible before eight days that then is as much as to 
refuse because the dress is wanted for the fete at vaux i repeat that it is 
impossible returned the obstinate old man by no means dear m percerin above all 
if i ask you said a mild voice at the door a silvery voice which made dartagnan 
prick up his ears it was the voice of aramis m dherblay cried the tailor aramis 
murmured dartagnan ah our bishop said porthos good-morning dartagnan 
good-morning porthos good-morning my dear friends said aramis come come m 
percerin make the barons dress and i will answer for it you will gratify m 
fouquet and he accompanied the words with a sign which seemed to say agree and 
dismiss them it appeared that aramis had over m percerin an influence superior 
even to dartagnans for the tailor bowed in assent and turning round upon 
porthos go and get measured on the other side said he rudely porthos colored in 
a formidable manner dartagnan saw the storm coming and addressing moliere said 
to him in an undertone you see before you my dear monsieur a man who considers 
himself disgraced if you measure the flesh and bones that heaven has given him 
study this type for me aristophanes and profit by it moliere had no need of 
encouragement and his gaze dwelt upon the baron porthos monsieur he said if you 
will come with me i will make them take your measure without the measurer 
touching you oh said porthos how do you make that out my friend i say that they 
shall apply neither line nor rule to the seams of your dress it is a new method 
we have invented for measuring people of quality who are too sensitive to allow 
low-born fellows to touch them we know some susceptible persons who will not 
put up with being measured a process which as i think wounds the natural 
dignity of man and if perchance monsieur should be one of these corboeuf i 
believe i am one of them well that is a capital coincidence and you will have 
the benefit of our invention but how in the devil can it be done asked porthos 
delighted monsieur said moliere bowing if you will deign to follow me you will 
see aramis observed this scene with all his eyes perhaps he fancied from 
dartagnans liveliness that he would leave with porthos so as not to lose the 
conclusion of a scene so well begun but clear-sighted as he was aramis deceived 
himself porthos and moliere left together dartagnan remained with percerin why 
from curiosity doubtless probably to enjoy a little longer the society of his 
good friend aramis as moliere and porthos disappeared dartagnan drew near the 
bishop of vannes a proceeding which appeared particularly to disconcert him a 
dress for you also is it not my friend aramis smiled no said he you will go to 
vaux however i shall go but without a new dress you forget dear dartagnan that 
a poor bishop of vannes is not rich enough to have new for every fete bah said 
the musketeer laughing and do we write no more poems now either oh dartagnan 
exclaimed aramis i have long given over all these follies true repeated 
dartagnan only half convinced as for percerin he had relapsed into his 
contemplation of the brocades dont you perceive said aramis smiling that we are 
greatly boring this good gentleman my dear dartagnan ah ah murmured the 
musketeer aside that is i am boring you my friend then aloud well then let us 
leave i have no further business here and if you are as disengaged as i aramis 
no not i i wished ah you had something private to say to m percerin why did you 
not tell me so at once something private certainly repeated aramis but not from 
you dartagnan i hope you will believe that i can never have anything so private 
to say that a friend like you may not hear it oh no no i am going said 
dartagnan but imparting to his voice an evident tone of curiosity for aramiss 
annoyance well dissembled as it was had not escaped him and he knew that in 
that impenetrable mind even the most apparently trivial thing was designed to 
some end an unknown one but one which from the knowledge he had of his friends 
character the musketeer felt must be important on his part aramis saw that 
dartagnan was not without suspicion and pressed him stay by all means he said 
this is what it is then turning towards the tailor my dear percerin said he i 
am even very happy that you are here dartagnan oh indeed exclaimed the gascon 
for the third time even less deceived this time than before percerin never 
moved aramis roused him violently by snatching from his hands the stuff upon 
which he was engaged my dear percerin said he i have near at hand m lebrun one 
of m fouquets painters ah very good thought dartagnan but why lebrun aramis 
looked at dartagnan who seemed to be occupied with an engraving of mark antony 
and you wish to have made for him a dress similar to those of the epicureans 
answered percerin and while saying this in an absent manner the worthy tailor 
endeavored to recapture his piece of brocade an epicureans dress asked 
dartagnan in a tone of inquiry i see said aramis with a most engaging smile it 
is written that our dear dartagnan shall know all our secrets this evening yes 
my friend you have surely heard speak of m fouquets epicureans have you not 
undoubtedly is it not a kind of poetical society of which la fontaine loret 
pellisson and moliere are members and which holds its sittings at st mande 
exactly so well we are going to put our poets in uniform and enroll them in the 
service of the king oh very well i understand a surprise m fouquet is getting 
up for the king be at ease if that is the secret about m lebrun i will not 
mention it always agreeable my friend no m lebrun has nothing to do with this 
part of it the secret which concerns him is far more important than the other 
then if it is so important as all that i prefer not to know it said dartagnan 
making a show of departure come in m lebrun come in said aramis opening a 
side-door with his right hand and holding back dartagnan with his left i faith 
i too am quite in the dark quoth percerin aramis took an opportunity as is said 
in theatrical matters my dear m percerin he continued you are making five 
dresses for the king are you not one in brocade one in hunting-cloth one in 
velvet one in satin and one in florentine stuffs yes but how do you know all 
that monseigneur said percerin astounded it is all very simple my dear monsieur 
there will be a hunt a banquet a concert a promenade and a reception these five 
kinds of dress are required by etiquette you know everything monseigneur and a 
great many more things too murmured dartagnan but cried the tailor in triumph 
what you do not know monseigneur prince of the church though you are what 
nobody will know what only the king mademoiselle de la valliere and myself do 
know is the color of the materials the nature of the ornaments and the cut the 
ensemble the finish of it all well said aramis that is precisely what i have 
come to ask you dear percerin ah bah exclaimed the tailor terrified though 
aramis had pronounced these words in his sweetest and most honeyed voice the 
request appeared on reflection so exaggerated so ridiculous so monstrous to m 
percerin that first he laughed to himself then aloud and finished with a shout 
dartagnan followed his example not because he found the matter so very funny 
but in order not to allow aramis to cool aramis suffered them to laugh and then 
when they had become quiet at first view said he i appear to be hazarding an 
absurd question do i not but dartagnan who is incarnate wisdom itself will tell 
you that i could not do otherwise than ask you this let us see said the 
attentive musketeer perceiving with his wonderful instinct that they had only 
been skirmishing till now and that the moment of battle was approaching let us 
see said percerin incredulously why now continued aramis does m fouquet give 
the king a fete is it not to please him assuredly said percerin dartagnan 
nodded assent by delicate attentions by some happy device by a succession of 
surprises like that of which we were talking the enrollment of our epicureans 
admirable well then this is the surprise we intend my good friend m lebrun here 
is a man who draws most exactly yes said percerin i have seen his pictures and 
observed that the dresses were highly elaborated that is why i at once agreed 
to make him a costume whether one to agree with those of the epicureans or an 
original one my dear monsieur we accept your offer and shall presently avail 
ourselves of it but just now m lebrun is not in want of the dresses you will 
make for himself but of those you are making for the king percerin made a bound 
backwards which dartagnan calmest and most appreciative of men did not consider 
overdone so many strange and startling aspects wore the proposal which aramis 
had just hazarded the kings dresses give the kings dresses to any mortal 
whatever oh for once monseigneur your grace is mad cried the poor tailor in 
extremity help me now dartagnan said aramis more and more calm and smiling help 
me now to persuade monsieur for you understand do you not eh eh not exactly i 
declare what you do not understand that m fouquet wishes to afford the king the 
surprise of finding his portrait on his arrival at vaux and that the portrait 
which will be a striking resemblance ought to be dressed exactly as the king 
will be on the day it is shown oh yes yes said the musketeer nearly convinced 
so plausible was this reasoning yes my dear aramis you are right it is a happy 
idea i will wager it is one of your own aramis well i dont know replied the 
bishop either mine or m fouquets then scanning percerin after noticing 
dartagnans hesitation well m percerin he asked what do you say to this i say 
that that you are doubtless free to refuse i know well and i by no means count 
upon compelling you my dear monsieur i will say more i even understand all the 
delicacy you feel in taking up with m fouquets idea you dread appearing to 
flatter the king a noble spirit m percerin a noble spirit the tailor stammered 
it would indeed be a very pretty compliment to pay the young prince continued 
aramis but as the superintendent told me if percerin refuse tell him that it 
will not at all lower him in my opinion and i shall always esteem him only only 
repeated percerin rather troubled only continued aramis i shall be compelled to 
say to the king you understand my dear m percerin that these are m fouquets 
words i shall be constrained to say to the king sire i had intended to present 
your majesty with your portrait but owing to a feeling of delicacy exaggerated 
perhaps but creditable m percerin opposed the project opposed cried the tailor 
terrified at the responsibility which would weigh upon him i to oppose the 
desire the will of m fouquet when he is seeking to please the king oh what a 
hateful word you have uttered monseigneur oppose oh tis not i who said it thank 
god i call the captain of the musketeers to witness it is it not true m 
dartagnan that i have opposed nothing dartagnan made a sign indicating that he 
wished to remain neutral he felt that there was an intrigue at the bottom of it 
whether comedy or tragedy he was disgusted at not being able to fathom it but 
in the mean while wished to keep clear but already percerin goaded by the idea 
that the king should be told he had stood in the way of a pleasant surprise had 
offered lebrun a chair and proceeded to bring from a wardrobe four magnificent 
dresses the fifth being still in the workmens hands and these masterpieces he 
successively fitted upon four lay figures which imported into france in the 
time of concini had been given to percerin ii by marechal dancre after the 
discomfiture of the italian tailors ruined in their competition the painter set 
to work to draw and then to paint the dresses but aramis who was closely 
watching all the phases of his toil suddenly stopped him i think you have not 
quite got it my dear lebrun he said your colors will deceive you and on canvas 
we shall lack that exact resemblance which is absolutely requisite time is 
necessary for observing the finer shades quite true said percerin but time is 
wanting and on that head you will agree with me monseigneur i can do nothing 
then the affair will fail said aramis quietly and that because of a want of 
precision in the colors nevertheless lebrun went on copying the materials and 
ornaments with the closest fidelity a process which aramis watched with 
ill-concealed impatience what in the devil now is the meaning of this imbroglio 
the musketeer kept saying to himself that will certainly never do said aramis m 
lebrun close your box and roll up your canvas but monsieur cried the vexed 
painter the light is abominable here an idea m lebrun an idea if we had a 
sample of the materials for example and with time and a better light oh then 
cried lebrun i would answer for the effect good said dartagnan this ought to be 
the knot of the whole thing they want a sample of each of the materials 
mordioux will this percerin give it now percerin beaten in his last retreat and 
duped moreover by the feigned good-nature of aramis cut out five samples and 
handed them to the bishop of vannes i like this better that is your opinion is 
it not said aramis to dartagnan my dear aramis said dartagnan my opinion is 
that you are always the same and consequently always your friend said the 
bishop in a charming tone yes yes said dartagnan aloud then in a low voice if i 
am your dupe double jesuit that you are i will not be your accomplice and to 
prevent it tis time i left this place adieu aramis he added aloud adieu i am 
going to rejoin porthos then wait for me said aramis pocketing the samples for 
i have done and shall not be sorry to say a parting word to our friend lebrun 
packed up percerin put back the dresses into the closet aramis put his hand on 
his pocket to assure himself that the samples were secure and they all left the 
study chapter xxxiii where probably moliere formed his first idea of the 
bourgeois gentilhomme dartagnan found porthos in the adjoining chamber but no 
longer an irritated porthos or a disappointed porthos but porthos radiant 
blooming fascinating and chatting with moliere who was looking upon him with a 
species of idolatry and as a man would who had not only never seen anything 
better but not even ever anything so good aramis went straight up to porthos 
and offered him his delicate hand which lost itself in the gigantic hand of his 
old friend an operation which aramis never hazarded without a certain 
uneasiness but the friendly pressure having been performed not too painfully 
for him the bishop of vannes passed over to moliere well monsieur said he will 
you come with me to st mande i will go anywhere you like monseigneur answered 
moliere to st mande cried porthos surprised at seeing the proud bishop of 
vannes fraternizing with a journeyman tailor what aramis are you going to take 
this gentleman to st mande yes said aramis smiling our work is pressing besides 
my dear porthos continued dartagnan m moliere is not altogether what he seems 
in what way asked porthos why this gentleman is one of m percerins chief clerks 
and he is expected at st mande to try on the dresses which m fouquet has 
ordered for the epicureans tis precisely so said moliere yes monsieur come then 
my dear m moliere said aramis that is if you have done with m du vallon we have 
finished replied porthos and you are satisfied asked dartagnan completely so 
replied porthos moliere took his leave of porthos with much ceremony and 
grasped the hand which the captain of the musketeers furtively offered him pray 
monsieur concluded porthos mincingly above all be exact you will have your 
dress after tomorrow monsieur the baron answered moliere and he left with 
aramis dartagnan taking porthoss arm inquired what has this tailor done for you 
my dear porthos that you are so pleased with him what has he done for me my 
friend done for me cried porthos enthusiastically yes i ask you what has he 
done for you my friend he has done that which no tailor ever yet accomplished 
he has taken my measure without touching me ah bah tell me how he did it first 
then they went i dont know where for a number of lay figures of all heights and 
sizes hoping there would be one to suit mine but the largest that of the 
drum-major of the swiss guard was two inches too short and half a foot too 
slender indeed it is exactly as i tell you dartagnan but he is a great man or 
at the very least a great tailor is this m moliere he was not at all put at 
fault by the circumstance what did he do then oh it is a very simple matter i 
faith tis an unheard of thing that people should have been so stupid as not to 
have discovered this method from the first what annoyance and humiliation they 
would have spared me not to speak of the dresses my dear porthos yes thirty 
dresses well my dear porthos tell me m molieres plan moliere you call him so do 
you i shall make a point of recollecting his name yes or poquelin if you prefer 
that no i like moliere best when i wish to recollect his name i shall think of 
voliere an aviary and as i have one at pierrefonds capital returned dartagnan 
and m molieres plan tis this instead of pulling me to pieces as all these 
rascals do making me bend in my back and double my joints all of them low and 
dishonorable practices dartagnan made a sign of approbation with his head 
monsieur he said to me continued porthos a gentleman ought to measure himself 
do me the pleasure to draw near this glass and i drew near the glass i must own 
i did not exactly understand what this good m voliere wanted with me moliere ah 
yes moliere moliere and as the fear of being measured still possessed me take 
care said i to him what you are going to do with me i am very ticklish i warn 
you but he with his soft voice for he is a courteous fellow we must admit my 
friend he with his soft voice said monsieur that your dress may fit you well it 
must be made according to your figure your figure is exactly reflected in this 
mirror we shall measure this reflection in fact said dartagnan you saw yourself 
in the glass but where did they find one in which you could see your whole 
figure my good friend it is the very glass in which the king sees himself yes 
but the king is a foot and a half shorter than you are ah well i know not how 
that may be it would no doubt be a way of flattering the king but the 
looking-glass was too large for me tis true that its height was made up of 
three venetian plates of glass placed one above another and its breadth of the 
three similar pieces in juxtaposition oh porthos what excellent words you have 
at your command where in the world did you make the collection at belle-isle 
aramis explained them to the architect ah very good let us return to the glass 
my friend then this good m voliere moliere yes moliere you are right you will 
see now my dear friend that i shall recollect his name too well this excellent 
m moliere set to work tracing out lines on the mirror with a piece of spanish 
chalk following throughout the shape of my arms and my shoulders all the while 
expounding this maxim which i thought admirable it is necessary that a dress 
should not incommode its wearer in reality said dartagnan that is an excellent 
maxim which is unfortunately seldom carried out in practice that is why i found 
it all the more astonishing when he expatiated upon it ah he expatiated parbleu 
let me hear his theory seeing that he continued one may in awkward 
circumstances or in a troublesome position have ones doublet on ones shoulder 
and not desire to take it off true said dartagnan and so continued m voliere 
moliere moliere yes and so went on m moliere you want to draw your sword 
monsieur and you have your doublet on your back what do you do i take it off i 
answered well no he replied how no i say that the dress should be so well made 
that it can in no way encumber you even in drawing your sword ah ah put 
yourself on guard pursued he i did it with such wondrous firmness that two 
panes of glass burst out of the window tis nothing nothing said he keep your 
position i raised my left arm in the air the forearm gracefully bent the ruffle 
drooping and my wrist curved while my right arm half extended securely covered 
my waist with the elbow and my breast with the wrist yes said dartagnan tis the 
true guard the academic guard you have said the very word dear friend in the 
mean while voliere moliere hold i should certainly after all prefer to call him 
what did you say his other name was poquelin i prefer to call him poquelin and 
how will you remember this name better than the other you understand he calls 
himself poquelin does he not yes i shall recall to mind madame coquenard good i 
shall change coq into poq nard into lin and instead of coquenard i shall have 
poquelin tis wonderful cried dartagnan astounded go on my friend i am listening 
to you with admiration this coquelin sketched my arm on the glass i beg your 
pardon poquelin what did i say then you said coquelin ah true this poquelin 
then sketched my arm on the glass but he took his time over it he kept looking 
at me a good deal the fact is that i was very handsome does it weary you he 
asked a little i replied bending a little in my hands but i could yet hold out 
an hour no no i will not allow it we have here some willing fellows who will 
make it a duty to support your arms as of old men supported those of the 
prophet very good i answered that will not be humiliating to you my friend said 
i there is i think a great difference between being supported and being 
measured the distinction is full of sense interrupted the captain then 
continued porthos he made a sign two lads approached one supported my left arm 
while the other with infinite address supported my right arm another man cried 
he a third approached support monsieur by the waist said he the garcon complied 
so that you were at rest asked dartagnan perfectly and poquenard drew me on the 
glass poquelin my friend poquelin you are right stay decidedly i prefer calling 
him voliere yes and then it was over wasnt it during that time voliere drew me 
on the mirror twas delicate in him i much like the plan it is respectful and 
keeps every one in his place and there it ended without a soul having touched 
me my friend except the three garcons who supported you doubtless but i have i 
think already explained to you the difference there is between supporting and 
measuring tis true answered dartagnan who said afterwards to himself i faith i 
greatly deceive myself or i have been the means of a good windfall to that 
rascal moliere and we shall assuredly see the scene hit off to the life in some 
comedy or other porthos smiled what are you laughing at asked dartagnan must i 
confess it well i was laughing over my good fortune oh that is true i dont know 
a happier man than you but what is this last piece of luck that has befallen 
you well my dear fellow congratulate me i desire nothing better it seems i am 
the first who has had his measure taken in that manner are you sure of it 
nearly so certain signs of intelligence that passed between voliere and the 
other garcons showed me the fact well my friend that does not surprise me from 
moliere said dartagnan voliere my friend oh no no indeed i am very willing to 
leave you to say voliere but i myself shall continue to say moliere well this i 
was saying does not surprise me coming from moliere who is a very ingenious 
fellow and whom you inspired with this grand idea it will be of great use to 
him by and by i am sure wont it be of use to him indeed i believe you it will 
and not a little so for you see my friend moliere is of all known tailors the 
man who best clothes our barons counts and marquises according to their measure 
on this observation neither the application nor the depth of which shall we 
discuss dartagnan and porthos quitted m percerins house and rejoined their 
carriage wherein we will leave them in order to look after moliere and aramis 
at st mande chapter xxxiv the beehive the bees and the honey the bishop of 
vannes much annoyed at having met dartagnan at m percerins returned to st mande 
in no very good humor moliere on the other hand quite delighted at having made 
such a capital rough sketch and at knowing where to find its original again 
whenever he should desire to convert his sketch into a picture arrived in the 
merriest of moods all the first story of the left wing was occupied by the most 
celebrated epicureans in paris and those on the freest footing in the house 
every one in his compartment like the bees in their cells employed in producing 
the honey intended for that royal cake which m fouquet proposed to offer his 
majesty louis xiv during the fete at vaux pellisson his head leaning on his 
hand was engaged in drawing out the plan of the prologue to les facheux a 
comedy in three acts which was to be put on the stage by poquelin de moliere as 
dartagnan called him or coquelin de voliere as porthos styled him loret with 
all the charming innocence of a journalist the journalists of all ages have 
always been so artless loret was composing an account of the fetes of vaux 
before those fetes had taken place la fontaine sauntered about among them a 
wandering absent-minded boring unbearable shade buzzing and humming at 
everybodys shoulder a thousand poetic inanities he so often disturbed pellisson 
that the latter raising his head crossly said at least la fontaine supply me 
with a rhyme since you say you have the run of the gardens at parnassus what 
rhyme do you want asked the fabler as madame de sevigne used to call him i want 
a rhyme to lumiere orniere answered la fontaine ah but my good friend one 
cannot talk of wheel-ruts when celebrating the delights of vaux said loret 
besides it doesnt rhyme answered pellisson how doesnt rhyme cried la fontaine 
in surprise yes you have an abominable habit my friend a habit which will ever 
prevent your becoming a poet of the first order you rhyme in a slovenly manner 
oh oh you think so do you pellisson yes i do indeed remember that a rhyme is 
never good so long as one can find a better then i will never write anything 
again but in prose said la fontaine who had taken up pellissons reproach in 
earnest ah i often suspected i was nothing but a rascally poet yes tis the very 
truth do not say so your remark is too sweeping and there is much that is good 
in your fables and to begin continued la fontaine following up his idea i will 
go and burn a hundred verses i have just made where are your verses in my head 
well if they are in your head you cannot burn them true said la fontaine but if 
i do not burn them well what will happen if you do not burn them they will 
remain in my mind and i shall never forget them the devil cried loret what a 
dangerous thing one would go mad with it the devil devil devil repeated la 
fontaine what can i do i have discovered the way said moliere who had entered 
during the last words of the conversation what way write them first and burn 
them afterwards how simple it is well i should never have discovered that what 
a mind that devil moliere has said la fontaine then striking his forehead oh 
thou wilt never be aught but an ass jean de la fontaine he added what are you 
saying there my friend broke in moliere approaching the poet whose aside he had 
heard i say i shall never be aught but an ass answered la fontaine with a heavy 
sigh and swimming eyes yes my friend he added with increasing grief it seems 
that i rhyme in a slovenly manner that is wrong you see i am a puppy who said 
so parbleu twas pellisson did you not pellisson pellisson again lost in his 
work took good care not to answer but if pellisson said you were a puppy cried 
moliere pellisson has gravely insulted you do you think so ah i advise you as 
you are a gentleman not to leave an insult like that unpunished oh exclaimed la 
fontaine did you ever fight once only with a lieutenant in the light horse what 
wrong had he done you it seems he was my wifes lover ah ah said moliere 
becoming slightly pale but as at la fontaines declaration the others had turned 
round moliere kept upon his lips the rallying smile which had so nearly died 
away and continued to make la fontaine speak and what was the result of the 
duel the result was that on the ground my opponent disarmed me and then made an 
apology promising never again to set foot in my house and you considered 
yourself satisfied said moliere not at all on the contrary i picked up my sword 
i beg your pardon monsieur i said i have not fought you because you were my 
wifes lover but because i was told i ought to fight now since i have never 
known any peace save since you made her acquaintance do me the pleasure to 
continue your visits as heretofore or morbleu let us set to again and so 
continued la fontaine he was compelled to resume his relations with madame and 
i continue to be the happiest of husbands all burst out laughing moliere alone 
passed his hand across his eyes why perhaps to wipe away a tear perhaps to 
smother a sigh alas we know that moliere was a moralist but he was not a 
philosopher it is all the same he said returning to the topic of the 
conversation pellisson has insulted you ah truly i had already forgotten and i 
am going to challenge him on your behalf well you can do so if you think it 
indispensable i do think it indispensable and i am going stay exclaimed la 
fontaine i want your advice upon what this insult no tell me really now whether 
lumiere does not rhyme with orniere i should make them rhyme ah i knew you 
would and i have made a hundred thousand such rhymes in my time a hundred 
thousand cried la fontaine four times as many as in la pucelle which m 
chapelain is meditating is it also on this subject that you have composed a 
hundred thousand verses listen to me you eternally absent-minded creature said 
moliere it is certain continued la fontaine that legume for instance rhymes 
with posthume in the plural especially yes especially in the plural seeing that 
then it rhymes not with three letters but with four as orniere does with 
lumiere put ornieres and lumieres in the plural my dear pellisson said la 
fontaine clapping his hand on the shoulder of his friend whose insult he had 
quite forgotten and they will rhyme hem cried pellisson moliere says so and 
moliere is a judge of it he declares he has himself made a hundred thousand 
verses come said moliere laughing he is off now it is like rivage which rhymes 
admirably with herbage i would take my oath of it but said moliere i tell you 
all this continued la fontaine because you are preparing an entertainment for 
vaux are you not yes les facheux ah yes les facheux yes i recollect well i was 
thinking a prologue would admirably suit your entertainment doubtless it would 
suit capitally ah you are of my opinion so much so that i asked you to write 
this prologue you asked me to write it yes you and on your refusal begged you 
to ask pellisson who is engaged upon it at this moment ah that is what 
pellisson is doing then i faith my dear moliere you speak with very good sense 
sometimes when when you call me absent-minded it is a wretched defect i will 
cure myself of it and i am going to write your prologue for you but seeing that 
pellisson is about it ah true double rascal that i am loret was indeed right in 
saying i was a puppy it was not loret who said so my friend well then whoever 
said so tis the same to me and so your entertainment is called les facheux well 
can you not make heureux rhyme with facheux if obliged yes and even with 
capricieux oh no no it would be hazardous and yet why so there is too great a 
difference in the cadences i was fancying said la fontaine leaving moliere for 
loret i was fancying what were you fancying said loret in the middle of a 
sentence make haste you are writing the prologue to les facheux are you not no 
mordieu it is pellisson ah pellisson cried la fontaine going over to him i was 
fancying he continued that the nymph of vaux ah beautiful cried loret the nymph 
of vaux thank you la fontaine you have just given me the two concluding verses 
of my paper et lon vit la nymphe de vaux donner le prix a leurs travaux good 
that is something like a rhyme said pellisson if you could rhyme like that la 
fontaine but it seems i do rhyme like that since loret says it is i who gave 
him the two lines he has just read well if you can rhyme so well la fontaine 
said pellisson tell me now in what way you would begin my prologue i should say 
for instance o nymphe qui after qui i should place a verb in the second person 
plural of the present indicative and should go on thus cette grotte profonde 
but the verb the verb asked pellisson pour venir admirer le plus grand roi du 
monde continued la fontaine but the verb the verb obstinately insisted 
pellisson this second person plural of the present indicative well then quittez 
o nymphe qui quittez cette grotte profonde pour venir admirer le plus grand roi 
du monde you would put qui quittez would you why not qui qui ah my dear fellow 
exclaimed la fontaine you are a shocking pedant without counting said moliere 
that in the second verse venir admirer is very weak my dear la fontaine then 
you see clearly that i am nothing but a poor creature a puppy as you said i 
never said so then as loret said and it was not loret either it was pellisson 
well pellisson was right a hundred times over but what annoys me more than 
anything my dear moliere is that i fear we shall not have our epicurean dresses 
you expected yours then for the fete yes for the fete and then for after the 
fete my housekeeper told me that my own is rather faded the devil your 
housekeeper is right rather more than faded ah you see resumed la fontaine the 
fact is i left it on the floor in my room and my cat well your cat she kittened 
upon it which has rather altered its color moliere burst out laughing pellisson 
and loret followed his example at this juncture the bishop of vannes appeared 
with a roll of plans and parchments under his arm as if the angel of death had 
chilled all gay and sprightly fancies as if that wail form had scared away the 
graces to whom xenocrates sacrificed silence immediately reigned through the 
study and every one resumed his self-possession and his pen aramis distributed 
the notes of invitation and thanked them in the name of m fouquet the 
superintendent he said being kept to his room by business could not come to see 
them but begged them to send him some of the fruits of their days work to 
enable him to forget the fatigue of his labor in the night at these words all 
settled to work la fontaine placed himself at a table and set his rapid pen 
running over the vellum pellisson made a fair copy of his prologue moliere gave 
fifty fresh verses with which his visit to percerin had inspired him loret his 
article on the marvellous fetes he predicted and aramis laden with booty like 
the king of the bees that great black drone decked with purple and gold 
re-entered his apartment silent and busy but before departing remember 
gentlemen said he we all leave tomorrow evening in that case i must give notice 
at home said moliere yes poor moliere said loret smiling he loves his home he 
loves yes replied moliere with his sad sweet smile he loves that does not mean 
they love him as for me said la fontaine they love me at chateau thierry i am 
very sure aramis here re-entered after a brief disappearance will any one go 
with me he asked i am going by way of paris after having passed a quarter of an 
hour with m fouquet i offer my carriage good said moliere i accept it i am in a 
hurry i shall dine here said loret m de gourville has promised me some crawfish 
il ma promis des ecrevisses find a rhyme for that la fontaine aramis went out 
laughing as only he could laugh and moliere followed him they were at the 
bottom of the stairs when la fontaine opened the door and shouted out moyennant 
que tu lecrevisses il ta promis des ecrevisses the shouts of laughter reached 
the ears of fouquet at the moment aramis opened the door of the study as to 
moliere he had undertaken to order the horses while aramis went to exchange a 
parting word with the superintendent oh how they are laughing there said 
fouquet with a sigh and do you not laugh monseigneur i laugh no longer now m 
dherblay the fete is approaching money is departing have i not told you that 
was my business yes you promised me millions you shall have them the day after 
the kings entree into vaux fouquet looked closely at aramis and passed his icy 
hand across his moistened brow aramis perceived that the superintendent either 
doubted him or felt that he was powerless to obtain the money how could fouquet 
suppose that a poor bishop ex-abbe ex-musketeer could procure it why doubt me 
said aramis fouquet smiled and shook his head man of little faith added the 
bishop my dear m dherblay answered fouquet if i fall well if you fall i shall 
at least fall from such a height that i shall shatter myself in falling then 
giving himself a shake as though to escape from himself whence come you said he 
my friend from paris from percerin and what have you been doing at percerins 
for i suppose you attach no great importance to our poets dresses no i went to 
prepare a surprise surprise yes which you are to give to the king and will it 
cost much oh a hundred pistoles you will give lebrun a painting ah all the 
better and what is this painting to represent i will tell you then at the same 
time whatever you may say of it i went to see the dresses for our poets bah and 
they will be rich and elegant splendid there will be few great monseigneurs 
with dresses so good people will see the difference between the courtiers of 
wealth and those of friendship ever generous and graceful dear prelate in your 
school fouquet grasped his hand and where are you going he said i am off to 
paris when you shall have given me a certain letter for whom m de lyonne and 
what do you want with lyonne i wish to make him sign a lettre de cachet lettre 
de cachet do you desire to put somebody in the bastille on the contrary to let 
somebody out and who a poor devil a youth a lad who has been imprisoned these 
ten years for two latin verses he made against the jesuits two latin verses and 
for two latin verses the miserable being has been in prison for ten years yes 
and has committed no other crime beyond this he is as innocent as you or i on 
your word on my honor and his name is seldon oh that is too cruel you knew this 
and you never told me twas only yesterday his mother applied to me monseigneur 
and the woman is poor in the deepest misery oh god said fouquet thou dost 
sometimes bear with such injustice on earth that i understand why there are 
wretches who doubt thy existence stay m dherblay and fouquet taking his pen 
wrote a few rapid lines to his colleague lyonne aramis took the letter and made 
ready to go wait said fouquet he opened his drawer and took out ten government 
notes which were there each for a thousand livres stay he said set the son at 
liberty and give this to the mother but above all tell her not what monseigneur 
that she is ten thousand livres richer than i she would say i am but a poor 
superintendent go and i hope that god will bless those who are mindful of his 
poor so also do i hope replied aramis kissing fouquets hand and he went out 
quickly carrying off the letter for lyonne and the notes for seldons mother and 
taking up moliere who was beginning to lose patience chapter xxxv another 
supper at the bastille seven oclock sounded from the great clock of the 
bastille that famous clock which like all the accessories of the state prison 
the very use of which is a torture brought to the prisoners notice the lapse of 
every hour of their suffering the timepiece of the bastille adorned with 
figures like most of the clocks of the period represented saint peter in bonds 
it was the supper hour of the unfortunate captives the doors grating on their 
enormous hinges opened for the passage of the baskets and trays of provisions 
the delicacy of which as m de baisemeaux has himself taught us was regulated by 
the condition in life of the prisoner we understand on this head the theories 
of m de baisemeaux sovereign dispenser of gastronomic delicacies head cook of 
the royal fortress whose trays full laden were ascending the steep staircases 
carrying some consolation to the prisoners in the bottom of honestly filled 
bottles this same hour was that of the governors supper also he had a guest 
to-day and the spit turned more heavily than usual roast partridges flanked 
with quails and flanking a larded leveret boiled fowls ham fried and sprinkled 
with white wine cardons of guipuzcoa and la bisque decrevisses these together 
with the soups and hors doeuvres constituted the governors bill of fare 
baisemeaux seated at table was rubbing his hands and looking at the bishop of 
vannes who booted like a cavalier dressed in gray with a sword at his side kept 
talking of his hunger and testifying the liveliest impatience m de baisemeaux 
de montlezun was not accustomed to the unbending movements of his greatness my 
lord of vannes and this evening aramis becoming quite sprightly volunteered 
confidence on confidence the prelate had again a little touch of the musketeer 
about him the bishop just trenched on the borders only of license in his style 
of conversation as for m de baisemeaux with the facility of vulgar people he 
gave himself loose rein on this touch of abandon on the part of his guest 
monsieur said he for indeed to-night i dont like to call you monseigneur by no 
means said aramis call me monsieur i am booted do you know monsieur of whom you 
remind me this evening no faith said aramis taking up his glass but i hope i 
remind you of a good companion you remind me of two monsieur francois shut the 
window the wind may annoy his greatness and let him go added aramis the supper 
is completely served and we shall eat it very well without waiters i like 
extremely to be tete-a-tete when i am with a friend baisemeaux bowed 
respectfully i like extremely continued aramis to help myself retire francois 
cried baisemeaux i was saying that your greatness puts me in mind of two 
persons one very illustrious the late cardinal the great cardinal of la 
rochelle who wore boots like you indeed said aramis and the other the other was 
a certain musketeer very handsome very brave very adventurous very fortunate 
who from being abbe turned musketeer and from musketeer turned abbe aramis 
condescended to smile from abbe continued baisemeaux encouraged by aramiss 
smile from abbe bishop and from bishop ah stay there i beg exclaimed aramis i 
say monsieur that you give me the idea of a cardinal enough dear m baisemeaux 
as you said i have on the boots of a cavalier but i do not intend for all that 
to embroil myself with the church this evening you have wicked intentions 
however monseigneur oh yes wicked i own as everything mundane is you traverse 
the town and the streets in disguise in disguise as you say and do you still 
use your sword yes i should think so but only when i am compelled do me the 
pleasure to summon francois have you no wine there tis not for wine but because 
it is hot here and the window is shut i shut the windows at supper-time so as 
not to hear the sounds or the arrival of couriers ah yes you hear them when the 
window is open but too well and that disturbs me you understand nevertheless i 
am suffocated francois francois entered open the windows i pray you francois 
you will allow him dear m baisemeaux you are at home here answered the governor 
the window was opened do you not think said m de baisemeaux that you will find 
yourself very lonely now that m de la fere has returned to his household gods 
at blois he is a very old friend is he not you know it as i do baisemeaux 
seeing that you were in the musketeers with us bah with my friends i reckon 
neither bottles nor years and you are right but i do more than love m de la 
fere dear baisemeaux i venerate him well for my part though tis singular said 
the governor i prefer m dartagnan to the count there is a man for you who 
drinks long and well that kind of people allow you at least to penetrate their 
thoughts baisemeaux make me tipsy tonight let us have a debauch as of old and 
if i have a trouble at the bottom of my heart i promise you you shall see it as 
you would a diamond at the bottom of your glass bravo said baisemeaux and he 
poured out a great glass of wine and drank it off at a draught trembling with 
joy at the idea of being by hook or by crook in the secret of some high 
archiepiscopal misdemeanor while he was drinking he did not see with what 
attention aramis was noting the sounds in the great court a courier arrived 
about eight oclock as francois brought in the fifth bottle and although the 
courier made a great noise baisemeaux heard nothing the devil take him said 
aramis what who asked baisemeaux i hope tis neither the wine you drink nor he 
who causes you to drink it no it is a horse who is making noise enough in the 
court for a whole squadron pooh some courier or other replied the governor 
redoubling his numerous bumpers yes the devil take him and so quickly that we 
shall never hear him speak more hurrah hurrah you forget me baisemeaux my glass 
is empty said aramis showing his dazzling goblet upon honor you delight me 
francois wine francois entered wine fellow and better yes monsieur yes but a 
courier has just arrived let him go to the devil i say yes monsieur but let him 
leave his news at the office we will see to it to-morrow to-morrow there will 
be time to-morrow there will be daylight said baisemeaux chanting the words ah 
monsieur grumbled the soldier francois in spite of himself monsieur take care 
said aramis take care of what dear m dherblay said baisemeaux half intoxicated 
the letter which the courier brings to the governor of a fortress is sometimes 
an order nearly always do not orders issue from the ministers yes undoubtedly 
but and what do these ministers do but countersign the signature of the king 
perhaps you are right nevertheless tis very tiresome when you are sitting 
before a good table tete-a-tete with a friend ah i beg your pardon monsieur i 
forgot that it is i who invite you to supper and that i speak to a future 
cardinal let us pass over that dear baisemeaux and return to our soldier to 
francois well and what has francois done he has demurred he was wrong then 
however he has demurred you see tis because there is something extraordinary in 
this matter it is very possible that it was not francois who was wrong in 
demurring but you who will be wrong in not listening to him wrong i to be wrong 
before francois that seems rather hard pardon me merely an irregularity but i 
thought it my duty to make an observation which i deem important oh perhaps you 
are right stammered baisemeaux the kings order is sacred but as to orders that 
arrive when one is at supper i repeat may the devil if you had said as much to 
the great cardinal eh my dear baisemeaux and if his order had been important i 
do it that i may not disturb a bishop morbleu am i not then excusable do not 
forget baisemeaux that i have worn the uniform and am accustomed to see 
everywhere obedience you wish then i wish that you should do your duty my 
friend yes at least before this soldier tis mathematically true exclaimed 
baisemeaux francois still waited let them send this order of the king up to me 
he said recovering himself and he added in a low tone do you know what it is i 
will tell you it is something about as interesting as this beware of fire near 
the powder-magazine or look close after such a one who is clever at escaping ah 
if you only knew monseigneur how many times i have been suddenly awakened from 
the very sweetest and deepest slumber by messengers arriving at full gallop to 
tell me or rather bring me a slip of paper containing these words m de 
baisemeaux what news tis clear enough that those who waste their time writing 
such orders have never slept in the bastille they would know better the 
thickness of my walls the vigilance of my officers the number of my rounds but 
indeed what can you expect monseigneur it is their business to write and 
torment me when i am at rest and to trouble me when i am happy added baisemeaux 
bowing to aramis then let us leave them to their business and do you do yours 
added the bishop smiling but with command in his expression notwithstanding 
francois re-entered baisemeaux took from his hands the ministers order he 
slowly undid it and as slowly read it aramis pretended to be drinking so as to 
be able to watch his host through the glass then having read it what was i just 
saying baisemeaux exclaimed what is it asked the bishop an order of release 
there now excellent news indeed to disturb us excellent news for him whom it 
concerns you will at least agree my dear governor and at eight oclock in the 
evening it is charitable oh charity is all very well but it is for that fellow 
who is low-spirited and not for me who am amusing myself said baisemeaux 
exasperated will you lose by him then and is the prisoner who is to be set at 
liberty a high payer oh yes indeed a miserable five-livre rat let me see it 
asked m dherblay it is no indiscretion by no means read it there is urgent on 
the paper you noticed that i suppose oh admirable urgent a man who has been 
there ten years it is urgent to set him free to-day this very evening at eight 
oclock urgent and baisemeaux shrugging his shoulders with an air of supreme 
disdain flung the order on the table and began eating again they are fond of 
these dodges he said with his mouth full they seize a man some fine day 
maintain him for ten years and write to you watch this fellow well or keep him 
very strictly and then as soon as you are accustomed to look upon the prisoner 
as a dangerous man all of a sudden without cause or precedent they write set 
him at liberty and add to their missive urgent you will own my lord tis enough 
to make one shrug his shoulders what do you expect it is they who write said 
aramis and it is for you to execute the order good good execute it oh patience 
you must not imagine that i am a slave gracious heaven my very good m 
baisemeaux who ever said so your independence is known thank heaven but your 
good heart also is known ah dont speak of it and your obedience to your 
superiors once a soldier you see baisemeaux always a soldier and so i shall 
strictly obey and to-morrow morning at daybreak the prisoner referred to shall 
be set free to-morrow at dawn why not this evening seeing that the lettre de 
cachet bears both on the direction and inside urgent because this evening we 
are at supper and our affairs are urgent too dear baisemeaux booted though i be 
i feel myself a priest and charity has higher claims upon me than hunger and 
thirst this unfortunate man has suffered long enough since you have just told 
me that lie has been your prisoner these ten years abridge his suffering his 
good time has come give him the benefit quickly god will repay you in paradise 
with years of felicity you wish it i entreat you what in the middle of our 
repast i implore you such an action is worth ten benedicites it shall be as you 
desire only our supper will get cold oh never heed that baisemeaux leaned back 
to ring for francois and by a very natural motion turned round towards the door 
the order had remained on the table aramis seized the opportunity when 
baisemeaux was not looking to change the paper for another folded in the same 
manner which he took from his pocket francois said the governor let the major 
come up here with the turnkeys of the bertaudiere francois bowed and quitted 
the room leaving the two companions alone chapter xxxvi the general of the 
order there was now a brief silence during which aramis never removed his eyes 
from baisemeaux for a moment the latter seemed only half decided to disturb 
himself thus in the middle of supper and it was clear that he was seeking some 
pretext whether good or bad for delay at any rate till after dessert and it 
appeared also that he had hit upon a pretext at last eh but it is impossible he 
cried how impossible said aramis give me a glimpse of this impossibility tis 
impossible to set a prisoner at liberty at such an hour where can he go to he 
who is unacquainted with paris he will go wherever he can you see now one might 
as well set a blind man free i have a carriage and will take him wherever he 
wishes you have an answer for everything francois tell monsieur the major to go 
and open the cell of m seldon no bertaudiere seldon exclaimed aramis very 
naturally you said seldon i think i said seldon of course tis the name of the 
man to be set free oh you mean to say marchiali said aramis marchiali oh yes 
indeed no no seldon i think you are making a mistake m baisemeaux i have read 
the order and i also and i saw seldon in letters as large as that and 
baisemeaux held up his finger and i read marchiali in characters as large as 
this said aramis holding up two fingers to the proof let us throw a light on 
the matter said baisemeaux confident he was right there is the paper you have 
only to read it i read marchiali returned aramis spreading out the paper look 
baisemeaux looked and his arms dropped suddenly yes yes he said quite 
overwhelmed yes marchiali tis plainly written marchiali quite true ah how the 
man of whom we have talked so much the man whom they are every day telling me 
to take such care of there is marchiali repeated the inflexible bishop of 
vannes i must own it monseigneur but i absolutely dont understand it you 
believe your eyes at any rate to tell me very plainly there is marchiali and in 
a good handwriting too tis a wonder i still see this order and the name of 
seldon irishman i see it ah i even recollect that under this name there was a 
blot of ink no there is no ink no there is no blot oh but there was though i 
know it because i rubbed the powder that was over the blot in a word be it how 
it may dear m baisemeaux said aramis and whatever you may have seen the order 
is signed to release marchiali blot or no blot the order is signed to release 
marchiali repeated baisemeaux mechanically endeavoring to regain his courage 
and you are going to release this prisoner if your heart dictates to you to 
deliver seldon also i declare to you i will not oppose it the least in the 
world aramis accompanied this remark with a smile the irony of which 
effectually dispelled baisemeauxs confusion of mind and restored his courage 
monseigneur said the governor this marchiali is the very same prisoner whom the 
other day a priest confessor of our order came to visit in so imperious and so 
secret a manner i dont know that monsieur replied the bishop tis no very long 
time ago dear m dherblay it is true but with us monsieur it is good that the 
man of to-day should no longer know what the man of yesterday did in any case 
said baisemeaux the visit of the jesuit confessor must have given happiness to 
this man aramis made no reply but recommenced eating and drinking as for 
baisemeaux no longer touching anything that was on the table he again took up 
the order and examined it in every way this investigation under ordinary 
circumstances would have made the ears of the impatient aramis burn with anger 
but the bishop of vannes did not become incensed for so little especially when 
he had murmured to himself that to do so was dangerous are you going to release 
marchiali he said what mellow and fragrant sherry this is my dear governor 
monseigneur replied baisemeaux i shall release the prisoner marchiali when i 
have summoned the courier who brought the order and above all when by 
interrogating him i have satisfied myself the order is sealed and the courier 
is ignorant of the contents what do you want to satisfy yourself about be it so 
monseigneur but i shall send to the ministry and m de lyonne will either 
confirm or withdraw the order what is the good of all that asked aramis coldly 
what good yes what is your object i ask the object of never deceiving ones self 
monseigneur of not failing in the respect which a subaltern owes to his 
superior officers nor neglecting the duties of that service which one has 
voluntarily accepted very good you have just spoken so eloquently that i cannot 
but admire you it is true that a subaltern owes respect to his superiors he is 
guilty when he deceives himself and he should be punished if he disregard 
either the duties or laws of his office baisemeaux looked at the bishop with 
astonishment it follows pursued aramis that you are going to ask advice in 
order to put your conscience at ease yes monseigneur and if a superior officer 
gives you orders you will obey never doubt it monseigneur you know the kings 
signature very well m de baisemeaux yes monseigneur is it not on this order of 
release it is true but it may be forged you mean that is possible monseigneur 
you are right and that of m de lyonne i see it plain enough on the order but 
just as the kings signature may have been forged so also even more likely may m 
de lyonnes your logic has the stride of a giant m de baisemeaux said aramis and 
your reasoning is irresistible but on what special grounds do you base your 
idea that these signatures are false on this the absence of counter-signatures 
nothing checks his majestys signature and m de lyonne is not there to tell me 
he has signed well m de baisemeaux said aramis bending an eagle glance on the 
governor i adopt so frankly your doubts and your mode of clearing them up that 
i will take a pen if you will give me one baisemeaux gave him a pen and a sheet 
of white paper added aramis baisemeaux handed some paper now i i also i here 
present incontestably i am going to write an order to which i am certain you 
will give credence incredulous as you are baisemeaux turned pale at this icy 
assurance of manner it seemed to him that that voice of aramis but just now so 
playful and so gay had become funereal and sinister that the wax-lights had 
changed into the tapers of a mortuary chapel and the glasses of wine into 
chalices of blood aramis took a pen and wrote baisemeaux in terror read over 
his shoulder a m d g wrote the bishop and he drew a cross under these four 
letters which signify ad majorem dei gloriam and thus continued it is our 
pleasure that the order brought to m de baisemeaux de montlezun governor for 
the king of the castle of the bastille be held by him good and effectual and be 
immediately carried into operation signed dherblay general of the order by the 
grace of god baisemeaux was so profoundly astonished that his features remained 
contracted his lips parted and his eyes fixed he did not move an inch nor 
articulate a sound nothing could be heard in that large chamber but the buzzing 
of a little moth which was fluttering about the candles aramis without even 
deigning to look at the man whom he had reduced to so miserable a condition 
drew from his pocket a small case of black wax he sealed the letter and stamped 
it with a seal suspended at his breast beneath his doublet and when the 
operation was concluded presented still in silence the missive to m de 
baisemeaux the latter whose hands trembled in a manner to excite pity turned a 
dull and meaningless gaze upon the letter a last gleam of feeling played over 
his features and he fell as if thunderstruck on a chair come come said aramis 
after a long silence during which the governor of the bastille had slowly 
recovered his senses do not lead me to believe dear baisemeaux that the 
presence of the general of the order is as terrible as that of the almighty and 
that men die merely from seeing him take courage rouse yourself give me your 
hand and obey baisemeaux reassured if not satisfied obeyed kissed aramiss hand 
and rose from his chair immediately he murmured oh there is no pressing haste 
my host take your place again and do the honors over this beautiful dessert 
monseigneur i shall never recover such a shock as this i who have laughed who 
have jested with you i who have dared to treat you on a footing of equality say 
nothing about it old comrade replied the bishop who perceived how strained the 
cord was and how dangerous it might be to break it say nothing about it let us 
each live in our own way to you my protection and my friendship to me your 
obedience exactly fulfilling these two requirements let us live happily 
baisemeaux reflected he perceived at a glance the consequences of this 
withdrawal of a prisoner by means of a forged order and putting in the scale 
the guarantee offered him by the official order of the general did not consider 
it of any value aramis divined this my dear baisemeaux said he you are a 
simpleton lose this habit of reflection when i give myself the trouble to think 
for you at another gesture made by aramis baisemeaux bowed again how shall i 
set about it what is the process for releasing a prisoner i have the 
regulations well then follow the regulations my friend i go with my major to 
the prisoners room and conduct him if he is a personage of importance but this 
marchiali is not an important personage said aramis carelessly i dont know 
answered the governor as if he would have said it is for you to instruct me 
then if you dont know it i am right so act towards marchiali as you act towards 
one of obscure station good the regulations so provide they are to the effect 
that the turnkey or one of the lower officials shall bring the prisoner before 
the governor in the office well tis very wise that and then then we return to 
the prisoner the valuables he wore at the time of his imprisonment his clothes 
and papers if the ministers order has not otherwise directed what was the 
ministers order as to this marchiali nothing for the unhappy man arrived here 
without jewels without papers and almost without clothes see how simple it all 
is indeed baisemeaux you make a mountain of everything remain here and make 
them bring the prisoner to the governors house baisemeaux obeyed he summoned 
his lieutenant and gave him an order which the latter passed on without 
disturbing himself about it to the next whom it concerned half an hour 
afterwards they heard a gate shut in the court it was the door to the dungeon 
which had just rendered up its prey to the free air aramis blew out all the 
candles which lighted the room but one which he left burning behind the door 
this flickering glare prevented the sight from resting steadily on any object 
it multiplied tenfold the changing forms and shadows of the place by its 
wavering uncertainty steps drew near go and meet your men said aramis to 
baisemeaux the governor obeyed the sergeant and turnkeys disappeared baisemeaux 
re-entered followed by a prisoner aramis had placed himself in the shade he saw 
without being seen baisemeaux in an agitated tone of voice made the young man 
acquainted with the order which set him at liberty the prisoner listened 
without making a single gesture or saying a word you will swear the regulation 
requires it added the governor never to reveal anything that you have seen or 
heard in the bastille the prisoner perceived a crucifix he stretched out his 
hand and swore with his lips and now monsieur that you are free whither do you 
intend going the prisoner turned his head as if looking behind him for some 
protection which he had expected then was it that aramis came out of the shadow 
i am here he said to render the gentleman whatever service he may please to ask 
the prisoner slightly reddened and without hesitation passed his arm through 
that of aramis god have you in his holy keeping he said in a voice the firmness 
of which made the governor tremble as much as the form of the blessing 
astonished him aramis on shaking hands with baisemeaux said to him does my 
order trouble you do you fear their finding it here should they come to search 
i desire to keep it monseigneur said baisemeaux if they found it here it would 
be a certain indication of my ruin and in that case you would be a powerful and 
a last auxiliary for me being your accomplice you mean answered aramis 
shrugging his shoulders adieu baisemeaux said he the horses were in waiting 
making the carriage shake with their impatience baisemeaux accompanied the 
bishop to the bottom of the steps aramis caused his companion to enter before 
him then followed and without giving the driver any further order go on said he 
the carriage rattled over the pavement of the courtyard an officer with a torch 
went before the horses and gave orders at every post to let them pass during 
the time taken in opening all the barriers aramis barely breathed and you might 
have heard his heart beat against his ribs the prisoner buried in a corner of 
the carriage made no more sign of life than his companion at length a jolt more 
severe than the others announced to them that they had cleared the last 
watercourse behind the carriage closed the last gate that in the rue st antoine 
no more walls either on the right or left heaven everywhere liberty everywhere 
life everywhere the horses kept in check by a vigorous hand went quietly as far 
as the middle of the faubourg there they began to trot little by little whether 
they warmed over it or whether they were urged they gained in swiftness and 
once past bercy the carriage seemed to fly these horses ran thus as far as 
villeneuve-saint-georges where relays were waiting then four instead of two 
whirled the carriage away in the direction of melun and pulled up for a moment 
in the middle of the forest of senart no doubt the order had been given the 
postilion beforehand for aramis had no occasion even to make a sign what is the 
matter asked the prisoner as if waking from a long dream the matter is 
monseigneur said aramis that before going further it is necessary that your 
royal highness and i should converse i will wait an opportunity monsieur 
answered the young prince we could not have a better monseigneur we are in the 
middle of a forest and no one can hear us the postilion the postilion of this 
relay is deaf and dumb monseigneur i am at your service m dherblay is it your 
pleasure to remain in the carriage yes we are comfortably seated and i like 
this carriage it has restored me to liberty wait monseigneur there is yet a 
precaution to be taken what we are here on the highway cavaliers or carriages 
travelling like ourselves might pass and seeing us stopping deem us in some 
difficulty let us avoid offers of assistance which would embarrass us give the 
postilion orders to conceal the carriage in one of the side avenues tis exactly 
what i wished to do monseigneur aramis made a sign to the deaf and dumb driver 
of the carriage whom he touched on the arm the latter dismounted took the 
leaders by the bridle and led them over the velvet sward and the mossy grass of 
a winding alley at the bottom of which on this moonless night the deep shades 
formed a curtain blacker than ink this done the man lay down on a slope near 
his horses which on either side kept nibbling the young oak shoots i am 
listening said the young prince to aramis but what are you doing there i am 
disarming myself of my pistols of which we have no further need monseigneur 
chapter xxxvii the tempter ay prince said aramis turning in the carriage 
towards his companion weak creature as i am so unpretending in genius so low in 
the scale of intelligent beings it has never yet happened to me to converse 
with a man without penetrating his thoughts through that living mask which has 
been thrown over our mind in order to retain its expression but to-night in 
this darkness in the reserve which you maintain i can read nothing on your 
features and something tells me that i shall have great difficulty in wresting 
from you a sincere declaration i beseech you then not for love of me for 
subjects should never weigh as anything in the balance which princes hold but 
for love of yourself to attend to every syllable i may utter and to every tone 
of my voice which under our present grave circumstances will all have a sense 
and value as important as any words ever spoken in the world i listen repeated 
the young prince decidedly without either eagerly seeking or fearing anything 
you are about to say to me and he sank still deeper in the thick cushions of 
the carriage trying to deprive his companion not only of the sight of him but 
even of the very idea of his presence black was the darkness which fell wide 
and dense from the summits of the intertwining trees the carriage covered in by 
this vast roof would not have received a particle of light not even if a ray 
could have struggled through the wreaths of mist which were rising in the 
avenue of the wood monseigneur resumed aramis you know the history of the 
government which to-day controls france the king issued from an infancy 
imprisoned like yours obscure as yours and confined as yours only instead of 
enduring like yourself this slavery in a prison this obscurity in solitude 
these straitened circumstances in concealment he has borne all these miseries 
humiliations and distresses in full daylight under the pitiless sun of royalty 
on an elevation so flooded with light where every stain appears a miserable 
blemish and every glory a stain the king has suffered it rankles in his mind 
and he will avenge himself he will be a bad king i say not that he will pour 
out blood like louis xi or charles ix for he has no mortal injuries to avenge 
but he will devour the means and substance of his people for he has himself 
suffered injuriously as to his own welfare and possessions in the first place 
then i quite acquit my conscience when i consider openly the merits and faults 
of this prince and if i condemn him my conscience absolves me aramis paused it 
was not to ascertain if the silence of the forest remained undisturbed but it 
was to gather up his thoughts from the very bottom of his soul and to leave the 
thoughts he had uttered sufficient time to eat deeply into the mind of his 
companion all that god does he does well continued the bishop of vannes and i 
am so persuaded of it that i have long been thankful to have been chosen 
depositary of the secret which i have aided you to discover to a just 
providence was necessary an instrument at once penetrating persevering and 
convinced to accomplish a great work i am this instrument i possess penetration 
perseverance conviction i govern a mysterious people who has taken for its 
motto the motto of god patiens quia aeternus the prince moved i divine 
monseigneur why you raise your head and that my having rule over a people 
astonishes you you did not know you were dealing with a king oh monseigneur 
king of a people very humble very poor humble because they have no force save 
when creeping poor because never almost never in this world do my people reap 
the harvest they sow or eat the fruit they cultivate they labor for an abstract 
idea they heap together all the atoms of their power to form one man and round 
this man with the sweat of their labor they create a misty halo which his 
genius shall in turn render a glory gilded with the rays of all the crowns in 
christendom such is the man you have beside you monseigneur he has drawn you 
from the abyss for a great purpose and he desires in furtherance of this 
sublime purpose to raise you above the powers of the earth above himself the 
prince lightly touched aramiss arm you speak to me he said of that religious 
order whose chief you are for me the result of your words is that the day you 
desire to hurl down the man you shall have raised the event will be 
accomplished and that you will keep under your hand your creature of to-day 
undeceive yourself monseigneur replied the bishop i should not take the trouble 
to play this terrible game with your royal highness if i had not a double 
interest in winning the day you are elevated you are elevated forever you will 
overturn the footstool as you rise and will send it rolling so far that not 
even the sight of it will ever again recall to you its right to your 
remembrance oh monsieur your movement monseigneur arises from an excellent 
disposition i thank you be well assured i aspire to more than gratitude i am 
convinced that when arrived at the summit you will judge me still more worthy 
to be your friend and then monseigneur we two will do such great deeds that 
ages hereafter shall speak of them tell me plainly monsieur tell me without 
disguise what i am today and what you aim at my being tomorrow you are the son 
of king louis xiii brother of louis xiv you are the natural and legitimate heir 
to the throne of france in keeping you near him as monsieur has been kept 
monsieur your younger brother the king would reserve to himself the right of 
being legitimate sovereign the doctors only and god could dispute his 
legitimacy but the doctors always prefer the king who is to the king who is not 
god has wrought against himself in wronging a prince who is an honest man but 
god has willed that you should be persecuted and this persecution to-day 
consecrates you king of france you had then a right to reign seeing that it is 
disputed you had a right to be proclaimed seeing that you have been concealed 
you are of kingly blood since no one has dared to shed your blood as your 
servants has been shed now see what he has done for you this god whom you so 
often accused of having in every way thwarted you he has given you the features 
figure age and voice of your brother and the very causes of your persecution 
are about to become those of your triumphant restoration to-morrow after 
to-morrow from the very first regal phantom living shade of louis xiv you will 
sit upon his throne whence the will of heaven confided in execution to the arm 
of man will have hurled him without hope of return i understand said the prince 
my brothers blood will not be shed then you will be sole arbiter of his fate 
the secret of which they made an evil use against me you will employ it against 
him what did he do to conceal it he concealed you living image of himself you 
will defeat the conspiracy of mazarin and anne of austria you my prince will 
have the same interest in concealing him who will as a prisoner resemble you as 
you will resemble him as king i return to what i was saying to you who will 
guard him who guarded you you know this secret you have made use of it with 
regard to myself who else knows it the queen-mother and madame de chevreuse 
what will they do nothing if you choose how is that how can they recognize you 
if you act so that no one can recognize you tis true but there are grave 
difficulties state them prince my brother is married i cannot take my brothers 
wife i will cause spain to consent to a divorce it is in the interest of your 
new policy it is human morality all that is really noble and really useful in 
this world will find its account therein the imprisoned king will speak to whom 
do you think he should speak to the walls you mean by walls the men in whom you 
put confidence if need be yes and besides your royal highness besides i was 
going to say that the designs of providence do not stop on such a fair road 
every scheme of this calibre is completed by its results like a geometrical 
calculation the king in prison will not be for you the cause of embarrassment 
that you have been for the king enthroned his soul is naturally proud and 
impatient it is moreover disarmed and enfeebled by being accustomed to honors 
and by the license of supreme power god who has willed that the concluding step 
in the geometrical calculation i have had the honor of describing to your royal 
highness should be your accession to the throne and the destruction of him who 
is hurtful to you has also determined that the conquered one shall soon end 
both his own and your sufferings therefore his soul and body have been adapted 
for but a brief agony put into prison as a private individual left alone with 
your doubts deprived of everything you have met all with the force of 
uninterrupted custom but your brother a captive forgotten and in bonds will not 
long endure the calamity and heaven will resume his soul at the appointed time 
that is to say soon at this point in aramiss gloomy analysis a bird of night 
uttered from the depths of the forest that prolonged and plaintive cry which 
makes every creature tremble i will exile the deposed king said philippe 
shuddering twill be more humane the kings good pleasure will decide the point 
said aramis but has the problem been well put have i brought out the solution 
according to the wishes or the foresight of your royal highness yes monsieur 
yes you have forgotten nothing except indeed two things the first let us speak 
of it at once with the same frankness we have already used let us speak of the 
causes which may bring about the ruin of all the hopes we have conceived let us 
speak of the dangers we incur they would be immense infinite terrific 
insurmountable if as i have said all things did not concur in rendering them 
absolutely of no account there is no danger either for you or for me if the 
constancy and intrepidity of your royal highness are equal to that perfection 
of resemblance to your brother which nature has bestowed upon you i repeat it 
there are no dangers only obstacles a word indeed which i find in all languages 
but have always ill understood and were i king would have obliterated as 
useless and absurd yes indeed monsieur there is a very serious obstacle an 
insurmountable danger which you are forgetting ah said aramis there is 
conscience which cries aloud remorse which lacerates oh that is true said the 
bishop there is a weakness of heart of which you remind me oh you are right 
that indeed is an immense obstacle the horse afraid of the ditch leaps into the 
middle of it and is killed the man who trembling crosses his sword with that of 
another leaves loopholes by which death enters have you a brother said the 
young man to aramis i am alone in the world said the latter with a hard dry 
voice but surely there is some one in the world whom you love added philippe no 
one yes i love you the young man sank into so profound a silence that the sound 
of his breathing seemed to aramis like a roaring tumult monseigneur he resumed 
i have not said all i had to say to your royal highness i have not offered you 
all the salutary counsels and useful resources which i have at my disposal it 
is useless to flash bright visions before the eyes of one who loves darkness 
useless too is it to let the grand roar of the cannon sound in the ears of one 
who loves repose and the quiet of the country monseigneur i have your happiness 
spread out before me in my thoughts i will let it fall from my lips take it up 
carefully for yourself who look with such tender regard upon the bright heavens 
the verdant meadows the pure air i know a country full of delights an unknown 
paradise a corner of the world where alone unfettered and unknown in the woods 
amidst flowers and streams of rippling water you will forget all the misery 
that human folly has so recently allotted you oh listen to me my prince i do 
not jest i have a soul and can read to the depths of your own i will not take 
you unready for your task in order to cast you into the crucible of my own 
desires or my caprice or my ambition everything or nothing you are chilled sick 
at heart almost overcome by the excess of emotion which but one hours liberty 
has produced in you for me that is a certain and unmistakable sign that you do 
not wish for large and long respiration let us choose then a life more humble 
better suited to our strength heaven is my witness that i wish your happiness 
to be the result of the trial to which i have exposed you speak speak said the 
prince with a vivacity which did not escape aramis i know resumed the prelate 
in the bas-poitou a canton of which no one in france suspects the existence 
twenty leagues of country it is immense is it not twenty leagues monseigneur 
all covered with water and herbage and reeds the whole studded with islands 
covered with woods these large marshes covered with reeds as with a thick 
mantle sleep silently and calmly under the smiling sun a few fishermen with 
their families pass their lives away there with their large rafts of poplars 
and alders the flooring formed of reeds and the roof woven out of thick rushes 
these barks these floating houses are wafted to and fro by the changing winds 
whenever they touch a bank it is but by chance and so gently too that the 
sleeping fisherman is not awakened by the shock should he wish to land it is 
because he has seen a large flight of landrails or plovers of wild ducks teal 
widgeon or woodcocks which fall an easy prey to his nets or his gun silver shad 
eels greedy pike red and gray mullet fall in masses into his nets he has but to 
choose the finest and largest and return the others to the waters never yet has 
the foot of man be he soldier or simple citizen never has any one indeed 
penetrated into that district the suns rays there are soft and tempered in 
plots of solid earth whose soil is rich and fertile grows the vine which 
nourishes with its generous juice its black and white grapes once a week a boat 
is sent to fetch the bread which has been baked at an oven the common property 
of all there like the seigneurs of early days powerful because of your dogs 
your fishing-lines your guns and your beautiful reed-built house would you live 
rich in the produce of the chase in the plenitude of security there would years 
of your life roll away at the end of which unrecognizable transformed you will 
have compelled heaven to reshape your destiny there are a thousand pistoles in 
this bag monseigneur more than sufficient to purchase the whole marsh of which 
i have spoken more than enough to live there as many years as you have days to 
live more than enough to constitute you the richest the freest and the happiest 
man in the country accept it as i offer it to you sincerely cheerfully 
forthwith from the carriage here we will unharness two of the horses the mute 
my servant shall conduct you travelling by night sleeping by day to the 
locality i have mentioned and i shall at least have the satisfaction of knowing 
that i have rendered to my prince the service that he himself preferred i shall 
have made one man happy and heaven for that will hold me in better account than 
if i had made one man powerful for that is far more difficult and now 
monseigneur your answer to this proposition here is the money nay do not 
hesitate at poitou you can risk nothing except the chance of catching the 
fevers prevalent there and even of them the so-called wizards of the country 
may cure you for your pistoles if you play the other game you run the chance of 
being assassinated on a throne or of being strangled in a prison upon my soul i 
assure you now i compare them together upon my life i should hesitate monsieur 
replied the young prince before i determine let me alight from this carriage 
walk on the ground and consult that voice by which god speaks in unsullied 
nature ten minutes and i will answer as you please monseigneur said aramis 
bending before him with respect so solemn and august in its tone and address 
had been the voice which had just spoken chapter xxxviii crown and tiara aramis 
was the first to descend from the carriage he held the door open for the young 
man he saw him place his foot on the mossy ground with a trembling of the whole 
body and walk round the carriage with an unsteady and almost tottering step it 
seemed as if the poor prisoner were unaccustomed to walk on gods earth it was 
the th of august about eleven oclock at night thick clouds portending a tempest 
overspread the heavens and shrouded all light and prospect beneath their heavy 
folds the extremities of the avenues were imperceptibly detached from the copse 
by a lighter shadow of opaque gray which upon closer examination became visible 
in the midst of the obscurity but the fragrance which ascended from the grass 
fresher and more penetrating than that which exhaled from the trees around him 
the warm and balmy air which enveloped him for the first time in years the 
ineffable enjoyment of liberty in an open country spoke to the prince in a 
language so intoxicating that notwithstanding the great reserve we should 
almost say the dissimulation of which we have tried to give an idea he could 
not restrain his emotion and breathed a sigh of joy then by degrees he raised 
his aching head and inhaled the perfumed air as it was wafted in gentle gusts 
across his uplifted face crossing his arms on his chest as if to control this 
new sensation of delight he drank in delicious draughts of that mysterious air 
which penetrates at night-time through lofty forests the sky he was 
contemplating the murmuring waters the moving creatures were not these real was 
not aramis a madman to suppose that he had aught else to dream of in this world 
those exciting pictures of country life so free from cares from fears and 
troubles that ocean of happy days which glitters incessantly before all 
youthful imaginations those were real allurements wherewith to fascinate an 
unhappy prisoner worn out by prison life and emaciated by the close air of the 
bastille it was the picture it will be remembered drawn by aramis when he 
offered to the prince a thousand pistoles which he had with him in the carriage 
the enchanted eden which the deserts of bas-poitou hid from the eyes of the 
world similar to these were the reflections of aramis as he watched with an 
anxiety impossible to describe the silent progress of the emotions of philippe 
whom he perceived gradually becoming more and more absorbed in his meditations 
the young prince was offering up an inward prayer to heaven for a ray of light 
upon that perplexity whence would issue his death or his life it was an anxious 
time for the bishop of vannes who had never before been so perplexed was his 
iron will accustomed to overcome all obstacles never finding itself inferior or 
vanquished to be foiled in so vast a project from not having foreseen the 
influence which a few tree-leaves and a few cubic feet of air might have on the 
human mind aramis overwhelmed by anxiety contemplated the painful struggle 
which was taking place in philippes mind this suspense lasted throughout the 
ten minutes which the young man had requested during that eternity philippe 
continued gazing with an imploring and sorrowful look towards the heavens 
aramis did not remove the piercing glance he had fixed on philippe suddenly the 
young man bowed his head his thoughts returned to the earth his looks 
perceptibly hardened his brow contracted his mouth assumed an expression of 
fierce courage and then again his look became fixed but now it reflected the 
flame of mundane splendors now it was like the face of satan on the mountain 
when he brought into view the kingdoms and the powers of earth as temptations 
to jesus aramiss appearance then became as gentle as it had before been gloomy 
philippe seizing his hand in a quick agitated manner exclaimed let us go where 
the crown of france is to be found is this your decision monseigneur asked 
aramis it is irrevocably so philippe did not even deign to reply he gazed 
earnestly at the bishop as if to ask him if it were possible for a man to waver 
after having once made up his mind those looks are flashes of fire which 
portray character said aramis bowing over philippes hand you will be great 
monseigneur i guarantee it let us resume our conversation i wished to discuss 
two points with you in the first place the dangers or the obstacles we may meet 
with that point is decided the other is the conditions you intend to impose on 
me it is your turn to speak m dherblay the conditions monseigneur doubtless you 
will not check me in my course for a trifle and you will not do me the 
injustice to suppose that i think you have no interest in this affair therefore 
without subterfuge or hesitation tell me the truth i will do so monseigneur 
once a king when will that be to-morrow evening i mean in the night explain to 
me how when i shall have asked your highness a question do so i sent to your 
highness a man in my confidence with instructions to deliver some closely 
written notes carefully drawn up which will thoroughly acquaint your highness 
with the different persons who compose and will compose your court i perused 
all the notes attentively i know them by heart and understood them pardon me 
but i may venture to ask that question of a poor abandoned captive of the 
bastille it will not be a requisite in a weeks time to question further a mind 
like yours when you will then be in full possession of liberty and power 
interrogate me then and i will be a scholar repeating his lesson to his master 
we will begin with your family monseigneur my mother anne of austria all her 
sorrows her painful malady oh i know her i know her your second brother asked 
aramis bowing to these notes replied the prince you have added portraits so 
faithfully painted that i am able to recognize the persons whose characters 
manners and history you have so carefully portrayed monsieur my brother is a 
fine dark young man with a pale face he does not love his wife henrietta whom i 
louis xiv loved a little and still flirt with even although she made me weep on 
the day she wished to dismiss mademoiselle de la valliere from her service in 
disgrace you will have to be careful with regard to watchfulness of the latter 
said aramis she is sincerely attached to the actual king the eyes of a woman 
who loves are not easily deceived she is fair has blue eyes whose affectionate 
gaze will reveal her identity she halts slightly in her gait she writes a 
letter every day to which i shall have to send an answer by m de saint-aignan 
do you know the latter as if i saw him and i know the last verses he composed 
for me as well as those i composed in answer to his very good do you know your 
ministers colbert an ugly dark-browed man but intelligent his hair covering his 
forehead a large heavy full head the mortal enemy of m fouquet we need not 
disturb ourselves about m colbert no because necessarily you will require me to 
exile him will you not aramis struck with admiration at the remark said you 
will become very great monseigneur you see added the prince that i know my 
lesson by heart and with heavens assistance and yours afterwards i shall seldom 
go wrong you have still a very awkward pair of eyes to deal with monseigneur 
yes the captain of the musketeers m dartagnan your friend yes i can well say my 
friend he who escorted la valliere to chaillot he who delivered up monk in a 
box to charles ii he who so faithfully served my mother he to whom the crown of 
france owes so much that it owes everything do you intend to ask me to exile 
him also never sire dartagnan is a man to whom at a certain given time i will 
undertake to reveal everything be on your guard with him for if he discovers 
our plot before it is revealed to him you or i will certainly be killed or 
taken he is a man of action i will consider now tell me about m fouquet what do 
you wish to be done with regard to him one moment more i entreat you 
monseigneur and forgive me if i seem to fail in respect in questioning you 
further it is your duty to do so and more than that your right also before we 
pass to m fouquet i should very much regret forgetting another friend of mine m 
du vallon the hercules of france you mean oh so far as he is concerned his 
fortune is assured no it is not he of whom i intended to speak the comte de la 
fere then and his son the son of all four of us the lad who is dying of love 
for la valliere of whom my brother so disloyally deprived him be easy on that 
score i shall know how to restore him tell me one thing m dherblay do men when 
they love forget the treachery that has been shown them can a man ever forgive 
the woman who has betrayed him is that a french custom is it a law of the human 
heart a man who loves deeply as deeply as raoul loves mademoiselle de la 
valliere finally forgets the fault of the woman he loves but i do not know 
whether raoul will forget i will provide for that have you anything further to 
say about your friend no that is all well then now for m fouquet what do you 
wish me to do for him to continue him as superintendent as he has hitherto 
acted i entreat you be it so but he is the first minister at present not quite 
so a king ignorant and embarrassed as i shall be will as a matter of course 
require a first minister of state your majesty will require a friend i have 
only one and that is you you will have many others by and by but none so 
devoted none so zealous for your glory you will be my first minister of state 
not immediately monseigneur for that would give rise to too much suspicion and 
astonishment m de richelieu the first minister of my grandmother marie de 
medicis was simply bishop of lucon as you are bishop of vannes i perceive that 
your royal highness has studied my notes to great advantage your amazing 
perspicacity overpowers me with delight i know indeed that m de richelieu by 
means of the queens protection soon became cardinal it would be better said 
aramis bowing that i should not be appointed first minister until after your 
royal highness had procured my nomination as cardinal you shall be nominated 
before two months are past m dherblay but that is a matter of very trifling 
moment you would not offend me if you were to ask more than that and you would 
cause me serious regret if you were to limit yourself to that in that case i 
have something still further to hope for monseigneur speak speak m fouquet will 
not continue long at the head of affairs he will soon get old he is fond of 
pleasure which at present is compatible with his labors thanks to the 
youthfulness which he still retains but this youthfulness will disappear at the 
approach of the first serious annoyance or upon the first illness he may 
experience we will spare him the annoyance because he is a brave and 
noble-hearted man but we cannot save him from ill-health so it is determined 
when you shall have paid all m fouquets debts and restored the finances to a 
sound condition m fouquet will be able to remain the sovereign ruler in his 
little court of poets and painters we shall have made him rich when that has 
been done and i shall have become your royal highnesss prime minister i shall 
be able to think of my own interests and yours the young man looked at his 
interlocutor m de richelieu of whom we were speaking just now said aramis was 
very blamable in the fixed idea he had of governing france 
